Title: Starter-Iterator Neural Operator: A Unified Architecture for High-Fidelity Forward and Inverse PDE Problems

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.18305v1

Published Time: Thu, 18 Jun 2026 00:04:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 40

Markdown Content:
# Graphical Abstract 

Starter-Iterator Neural Operator: A Unified Architecture for High-Fidelity Forward and Inverse PDE Prob-lems 

Kuilin Qin, Lianfang Wang, Xu Sun, Jiwei Jia, Yu Wang, Yong Wang, Yuping Duan 

> arXiv:2606.18305v1 [math.NA] 16 Jun 2026

# Highlights 

Starter-Iterator Neural Operator: A Unified Architecture for High-Fidelity Forward and Inverse PDE Prob-lems 

Kuilin Qin, Lianfang Wang, Xu Sun, Jiwei Jia, Yu Wang, Yong Wang, Yuping Duan • We propose SINO, a novel neural operator framework inspired by iterative numerical schemes, and establish a theoretical guarantee for its universal approximation property across a broad class of operator learning tasks. • By integrating the spectral characteristics of classical iterative methods, SINO mitigates the spectral bias inher-ent in standard deep learning models and enhances multi-scale feature learning, leading to improved approxi-mation accuracy. • We evaluate SINO across diverse benchmarks, including forward/inverse problems and complex system model-ing, consistently demonstrating enhanced accuracy and stability compared to state-of-the-art baselines. Starter-Iterator Neural Operator: A Unified Architecture for High-Fidelity Forward and Inverse PDE Problems 

Kuilin Qin a, Lianfang Wang a, Xu Sun b, Jiwei Jia b, Yu Wang c, Yong Wang d, Yuping Duan a, ∗

> aSchool of Mathematical Sciences, Beijing Normal University, 100875, Beijing, P.R. China
> bSchool of Mathematics, Jilin University, 130015, Jilin, P.R. China
> cKey Laboratory of Digital Technology in Medical Diagnostics of Zhejiang, 130000, Zhejiang, P.R. China
> dSchool of Physics, Nankai University, 300071, Tianjin, P.R. China

Abstract 

Operator learning is an emerging interdisciplinary field that integrates machine learning with scientific computing. By mapping infinite-dimensional function spaces, this approach provides an efficient surrogate modeling framework for high-dimensional partial differential equations (PDEs). Compared to traditional numerical solvers, it achieves a supe-rior trade-off between computational complexity and approximation accuracy, demonstrating significant advantages in many-query tasks such as real-time prediction and parameter sweeps. Given the stringent accuracy requirements of both forward simulation and inverse inference, as well as the precision bottlenecks of existing operator learning meth-ods in handling complex boundaries or long-term evolution, we propose the Starter-Iterator Neural Operator (SINO). Our framework reinterprets the initialization strategies and iterative formats of traditional iterative methods through neural networks, establishing an efficient approach for spectral-spatiotemporal collaborative modeling. Specifically, the frequency-domain initialization module captures globally stable low-frequency features, while the time-domain learning module focuses on optimizing local solution residuals, thereby effectively overcoming the inherent limi-tations of conventional single-domain modeling approaches. Extensive experiments on typical dynamical systems such as the Navier-Stokes equations and acoustic wave equations, as well as practical applications including super-resolution imaging and weather forecasting, demonstrate that SINO achieves outstanding performance in numerical accuracy, generalization capability, and robustness. 

Keywords: Operator learning, forward problem, inverse problem, iterative method, frequency learning 

1. Introduction 

Forward and inverse problems are fundamental tasks in scientific and engineering computing [1–3]. Forward prob-lems follow a deductive approach: they employ known principles, system parameters, and physical laws to construct mathematical models that predict or simulate system behavior. Such problems are widely encountered in structural me-chanics [4], computational acoustics [5], and weather forecasting [6, 7]. In contrast, inverse problems [8, 9] adopt an inductive strategy, using observational data to infer the internal properties, unknown parameters, or initial conditions of a system through mathematical inversion. They play a central role in applications such as seismic tomography [10] and medical image reconstruction [11]. Across a broad range of fields, such as geophysics, materials science, and environmental science, forward modeling and inverse problem solving collectively establish an iterative process that couples theoretical prediction with data-driven refinement. This interplay has become a fundamental component of modern scientific investigation. Forward problems are typically modeled using differential equations [12, 13] that describe the local behavior of a system within an infinitesimal region, adhering to principles such as force balance and energy conservation [14]. A   

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email address: doveduan@gmail.com (Yuping Duan)

common time-dependent formulation is: 



∂w(x, t )

∂t + Daw(x, t ) = s(x, t ), (x, t ) ∈ Ω × (0 , ∞),

w(x, 0) = w0(x), x ∈ Ω,

w(x, t ) = g(x, t ), x ∈ ∂Ω,

(1) where Da is a spatial differential operator parameterized by a variable coefficient field a(x), and s(x, t ) represents the source term. This formulation emphasizes the rate of change or derivatives of field quantities, like temperature or displacement. Additionally, forward problems can also be represented using integral equations, which account for interactive and cumulative effects across various regions of a system [15, 16]. A typical example is the Fredholm integral equation of the second kind: 

w(x) = s(x) + λ

Z

> Ω

K(x, y)w(y) dy, (2) where s(x) describes the known component or forcing term, w(x) is the unknown field that typically covers global or boundary interactions, and the kernel K(x, y) defines the action of the integral operator and can be viewed as the infinite-dimensional analogue of a matrix coefficient in continuous function spaces. This integral form captures global or boundary interactions, making it particularly useful for problems involving infinite domains or complex geometries. The inverse problem involves determining the unknown parameters or inputs of a system based on observed data. For the differential equation approach, generally as Eq. (1), the inverse problem typically involves estimating the spatial coefficient field a(x) or the source term s(x, t ) given observations of the field w(x, t ) over some spatial and time domains [17]. For the integral equation approach, shown as Eq. (2), the inverse problem may involve finding the unknown boundary source density σ(ξ) given boundary measurements w(x) [18]. Forward and inverse problems commonly use numerical discretization techniques such as finite element methods [19], finite difference methods [20], finite volume methods [21], and spectral methods [22]. These methods transform mathematical models describing continuous systems into discrete linear or nonlinear algebraic equations, laying the groundwork for subsequent solution using iterative numerical methods [23]. However, iterative methods are crucial for large-scale scientific computing but have notable limitations. Linear iterative methods [24], such as Jacobi [23] and Gauss-Seidel [25], rely heavily on matrix properties and are only effective for specific structures, struggling with slow convergence and high computational costs in ill-conditioned cases. Krylov subspace methods [26], like conjugate gradient [27] and generalized minimum residual method [28], are limited by preconditioner design, with constructing an effective preconditioner being a major challenge. For nonlinear problems, Newton’s method [29] offers only local convergence, is sensitive to initial guesses, and requires computing the Jacobian and solving a linear system at each step, leading to significant computational and memory demands. Neural operators have emerged as effective alternatives to traditional numerical solvers for solving classical for-ward and inverse problems [30–32], by learning continuous mappings between infinite-dimensional Banach spaces [33]. Recent advances in operator learning are deeply rooted in the finite basis representations of solution operators. From this perspective, a neural operator approximates the target mapping via a finite expansion, whose coefficients depend on the input function and whose basis functions span the output solution space. Consequently, the treatment of basis functions serves as the defining distinction among operator learning frameworks, categorizing the landscape into three primary classes. The first class comprises reduced-basis neural operators, which utilize basis functions pre-computed via classical model reduction techniques like Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) and Principal Component Analysis (PCA). Representative frameworks include POD-NN [34], PCANet [35], and DIPNet [36]. By exploiting the low-rank structure of the solution manifold, these approaches reduce the learning task to mapping inputs to expansion coefficients. While offering robust numerical stability and high computational efficiency—especially for compactly representable solutions—their generalization is inherently bounded by the a priori fixed basis; performance typically degrades when test data deviates from the training manifold. To enhance flexibility and expressivity, a sec-ond class directly learns basis functions from data. Epitomized by DeepONet [37] and its variants [38–40], these methods employ branch-trunk architectures to co-optimize coefficient mappings and basis functions. By bypassing pre-computed POD/PCA modes, they achieve superior cross-domain generalization. However, lacking explicit struc-tural constraints or physical priors, these learned bases can lead to diminished approximation accuracy and training instabilities when applied to complex, chaotic dynamical systems. A third class employs prescribed functional bases, analytically defined based on underlying physics. Notable examples include the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) [41], 2Spectral Neural Operator [42], Wavelet Neural Operator [43], and Laplace Neural Operator [44]. These frameworks leverage integral transforms (Fourier, wavelet, or Laplace) to represent operators in the spectral domain. By embed-ding strong inductive biases, they achieve high efficiency for systems with well-defined spectral characteristics. In particular, FNO and its derivatives [45–47] excel in PDEs dominated by low-frequency dynamics. Nonetheless, due to inherent spectral sampling limits and truncation effects, their performance often deteriorates under high-frequency regimes, compromising temporal stability in long-term autoregressive forecasting. Furthermore, architectures inspired by classical iterative algorithms offer a compelling alternative due to their in-herent convergence guarantees. For example, MgNO [48] incorporates multiscale iterative strategies and demonstrates performance superior to both categories mentioned above for several benchmark PDE problems. However, MgNO typ-ically requires a substantial number of parameters to achieve high accuracy due to its reliance on a zero-initialization scheme, and its emphasis on local features further limits its ability to capture the global dependency structures that are fundamental in many physical systems. The HINTs [23] framework enhances convergence speed and accuracy by em-bedding a DeepONet-based solver within Jacobi iterations. Despite its effectiveness, this approach depends on explicit access to the underlying linear operator, which restricts its applicability to complex tasks such as super-resolution and data-driven weather prediction. In this paper, we present the Starter-Iterator Neural Operator (SINO) framework, designed to address two persistent challenges in operator learning: accuracy saturation and the resulting instability in long-horizon temporal prediction. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a frequency-based starter module that provides an informed initial state for a subsequent iterator module. By capturing the dominant low-frequency components of the solution, the starter establishes a reliable coarse representation that mitigates spectral bias. This allows the iterator—implemented via a parameterized iterative scheme—to focus on refining high-frequency details and enhancing overall approximation accuracy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that this functional decomposition is highly effective: the starter recon-structs the fundamental global structure, while the iterator progressively resolves multi-scale features. This synergy significantly improves temporal robustness, enabling SINO to maintain stable performance over extended horizons and outperform state-of-the-art operator-learning approaches in long-term forecasting. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows: • We propose SINO, a novel neural operator architecture inspired by classical iterative numerical schemes, and establish a theoretical guarantee for its universal approximation property within a generalized operator learning framework. • By integrating the spectral characteristics of iterative solvers, SINO mitigates the spectral bias inherent in stan-dard deep learning models and enhances multi-scale feature representation, effectively transcending the accuracy bottlenecks of fixed-basis architectures. • We evaluate SINO across diverse benchmarks, including forward PDE solving, ill-posed inverse problems in super-resolution, and chaotic system modeling for weather prediction. The results consistently demonstrate enhanced accuracy and stability compared to strong baselines. The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we define the problem setup, discuss the mathematical motivation, and provide a detailed description of the SINO architecture alongside its approximation theory. In Section 3, we present numerical results, including an analysis of SINO’s spectral properties and evaluations on multiple PDE, microscopy, and meteorological datasets. Finally, Section 4 provides an in-depth discussion and summarizes our conclusions. For clarity, essential notations are summary in Table 1. 

2. Our Methodologies 

2.1. Linearization of Forward and Inverse Problems 

Given the forward problems to solve solution w(·, t ), belonging to an appropriate Sobolev space Y = L2(Td; Rdu ),governed by the Eq. (1), we first define a constant time step ∆t > 0 and apply the backward Euler semi-discretization in time to have w(t + ∆ t) − w(t)∆t + Daw(t + ∆ t) = s(t + ∆ t), t > 0.

This implicit relation can be rearranged into an operator form: 

(Id Y + ∆ tDa)w(t + ∆ t) = w(t) + ∆ t s(t + ∆ t). (3) 3Table 1: Summary of notations used in this paper. 

Symbol Description 

Ω Physical spatial domain. 

Td periodic torus, identified with [0 , 2π]d.

f , u Input source function and target solution function in the physical space. 

X , Y Input and output function spaces, i.e., Sobolev space Hs(Td; Rdf ) and L2(Td; Rdu ).

f s, u(n) 

> s

Latent input and approximate latent solution u at scale s and iteration step n.

Da Spatial differentiable operator in Eq. (1), which can be linear or nonlinear. 

La Linearized the nonlinear spatial operator Da with Picard-type representation. 

G Exact latent solution operator with u = G(f ).

Gθ Parameterized neural approximation of G.

A Linear or approximately linearized operator that admits general relation Au = f .

A(n) 

> θ

Parameterized approximation of A at the n-th refinement step. 

B Preconditioning or correction operator used in the fixed-point iteration. 

B(n) 

> θ

Parameterized correction operator at the n-th refinement step. 

Id X , Id Y Identity operator on X and Y space, respectively. 

S Starter operator that provides an initial approximation. 

I Single step iterative operator that performs iterative refinement. 

I∞ Iterative operator with multi-steps iteration even infinite steps. 

Sθ Learnable starter operator, typically implemented by a spectral neural operator. 

I(n) 

> θ

Learnable single-step iterative operator at n-th iteration step, also donated as Iθ

INθ Learnable multi-steps iterative operator with N steps. 

PK Fourier projection operator that retains modes up to the cutoff K.

GK Fourier-truncated approximation of G using modes up to K.

E(n) Error-transition operator donated as E(n) = Id Y − B (n) 

> θ

A(n) 

> θ

.

Rs Restriction operator from scale s to a coarser scale. 

Ts Prolongation or transposed-convolution operator from scale s to a finer scale. 

Rθ Learnable complex-valued spectral weights. 

Wθ Pointwise linear transformation in the neural network. 

σ(·) Nonlinear activation function, e.g., GELU or ReLU. In the case where Da is a linear spatial operator, the existence of the solution to Eq. (3) depends on the well-posedness of the operator A := Id Y + ∆ tDa. However, for a nonlinear operator Da, Eq. (3) necessitates the solution of a nonlinear system at each temporal increment. To preserve a consistent linear solver framework, we employ a Picard-type linearization strategy [49]. We assume that Da admits a representation through a state-dependent linear operator 

La(·), such that the term at the t + ∆ t-th level is approximated by freezing the nonlinearity at the previous state: 

Da(w(t + ∆ t)) ≈ L a(w(t)) w(t + ∆ t).

Substituting this approximation into the backward Euler scheme yields the linearized system: 

 Id Y + ∆ tLa(w(t)) w(t + ∆ t) = w(t) + ∆ t s(t + ∆ t).

By defining the unknown state u := w(t + ∆ t) and the cumulative source term f := w(t) + ∆ t s(t + ∆ t), both the linear and linearized nonlinear problems can be encapsulated in the following unified operator equation: 

Au = f , (4) where the forward operator A is defined as: 

A =

(Id Y + ∆ t Da, if Da is linear ,

Id Y + ∆ t La(w(t)) , if Da is nonlinear and Picard-linearized . (5) In both scenarios, the time-evolutionary problem is reduced to a sequence of stationary operator equations of the form (4) at each discrete temporal node, where u represents the unknown state at the (t + ∆ t) time level and f is a known 4element in the observation space, aggregating information from the previous state and the discretized source term. Consequently, the forward problem is recast as evaluating u under the operator A, which represents either the exact linear implicit operator or its Picard-linearized counterpart. This framework extends naturally to inverse problems governed by the integral formulation in Eq. (2). The operator A serves as the forward measurement map, projecting the latent field from the parameter space to the data space. By integrating the implicit semi-discretization of PDEs with integral representations, Eq. (4) establishes a unified operator-theoretic representation for both forward simulation and inverse reconstruction. It ensures that the structural properties of A are rigorously and uniquely determined by the underlying differential operators or integral kernels. 

2.2. Starter-Iterator Framework for the Linear Operator System 

Our objective is to identify a suitable functional representation that facilitates the parameterization of the linear or approximately linearized operator equations. Motivated by classical stationary iterative methods, we approach the solution u of the operator equation (4) via a fixed-point iteration. Let X = Hs(Td; Rdf ) denote the data space containing the right-hand side f , and Y be the solution space. Given an initial approximation u(0) ∈ Y , the sequence of iterates {u(n)}∞ 

> n=0

is generated by the following recursion: 

u(n+1) = u(n) + B



f − A u(n)

, n = 0 , 1, 2, . . . , (6) where B : X → Y is the preconditioner acting as an approximation to the inverse of A if exists, and r(n) = f −A u(n)

is the residual at the n-th iteration. The convergence of this sequence is governed by the error propagation operator 

E = Id Y − BA , where Id Y denotes the identity operator on the solution space. Specifically, the error e(n) = u − u(n)

evolves according to e(n+1) = Ee(n). For bounded linear operators on the Sobolev space Y, a necessary and sufficient condition for the guaranteed convergence to the exact solution for any initial guess is that the spectral radius satisfies 

ρ(E) < 1 [50]. The efficacy of such solvers depends on two functional stages: a high-quality initialization to minimize the starting residual, and a robust iterative refinement to ensure asymptotic stability and rapid contraction. Formally, let G : X → Y be the target solution mapping such that AG (f ) = f . Within the proposed framework, 

G is decomposed into two fundamental components: a starter S and an infinite iterator I∞. The starter S provides the initial approximation: 

S : X → Y , u(0) = S(f ).

The single-step iterator I characterizes the refinement mechanism, mapping the current state and the data to the subsequent approximation: 

I : Y × X → Y , I(u, f ) := u + B (f − A u) . (7) Furthermore, we define the infinite iteration operator I∞ : Y ×X → Y as the limit mapping of the dynamical process: 

I∞(u(0) , f ) := lim  

> n→∞

In(u(0) , f ),

where In denotes n successive applications of the iteration rule. To establish a rigorous operator-level composition, we introduce the augmented starter (S, Id X ) : X → Y × X , which maps the input f to the pair (S(f ), f ). Consequently, the global solution operator G is structurally characterized as the algebraic composition: 

G = I∞ ◦ (S, Id X ). (8) This decomposition explicitly decouples the two core tenets of numerical stability: the approximation capability of the starter and the contractive refinement of the iterator. 

2.3. Starter-Iterator Neural Operator 

We introduce the Starter-Iterator Neural Operator (SINO), a framework designed to bridge classical iterative anal-ysis with operator learning. The SINO architecture, denoted by Gθ , is partitioned into a starter operator Sθ and an unrolled iterator operator INθ , mimicking the initialization and iterative refinement stages of numerical solvers, re-spectively. 

Starter operator. In numerical analysis, an initial guess containing the dominant low-frequency components of the target solution significantly accelerates the convergence of fixed-point iterations. Inspired by spectral methods, Sθ

is designed as a learnable spectral filtering layer to extract principal smooth modes. Considering a periodic domain 5Ω = Td, the functions f and u are characterized by their Fourier series expansions. Let f ∈ Hs(Ω; Rdf ) denote the input data and u ∈ L2(Ω; Rdu ) represent the target features. Utilizing the orthonormal Fourier basis {ei⟨k,x ⟩}k∈Zd ,the functions f and u admit the following spectral representations: 

f (x) = X

> k∈Zd

bf (k)ei⟨k,x ⟩, u(x) = X

> k∈Zd

bu(k)ei⟨k,x ⟩,

where bf (k) and bu(k) are the Fourier coefficients. For a prescribed truncation level K > 0, we define the Fourier projection operator PK , which filters out high-frequency modes beyond the specified threshold: 

PK : L2(Ω) 7 → L2(Ω) , PK (f ) = X

> |k|∞<K

bf (k)ei⟨k,x ⟩.

We then introduce a learnable starter operator Sθ to effectively capture the dominant low-frequency components of the target u. This operator is designed to generate an initial approximation by modulating the projected spectral modes: 

Sθ : Hs(Ω) → L2(Ω) , Sθ (f ) := σ



Wθ f + F−1 Rθ (k) F(PK f )( k)

, (9) where F and F−1 denote the Fourier transform pair, Rθ (k) are learnable spectral weights, Wθ is a pointwise linear transformation, and σ is a nonlinear activation function. 

Iterator operator. Once the starter operator Sθ yields the initial approximation u(0) , the solution is refined through an iterator operator inspired by classical fixed-point schemes. We construct a recursive sequence: 

u(n+1) = u(n) + ∆ u(n), n = 0 , 1, · · · , N − 1

where the correction term is defined as the preconditioned residual: 

∆u(n) = B(n)

> θ

 f − A (n) 

> θ

u(n),

and A(n) 

> θ

: L2(Ω) 7 → Hs(Ω) and B(n) 

> θ

: Hs(Ω) 7 → L2(Ω) are parameterized neural operators approximating the forward operator and the preconditioning operator, respectively. This update is reformulated as an affine mapping 

I(n) 

> θ

: L2(Ω) × Hs(Ω) → L2(Ω) :

u(n+1) := I(n) 

> θ

(u(n), f ) = E(n) 

> θ

u(n) + B(n) 

> θ

f .

where E(n) 

> θ

= Id Y − B (n) 

> θ

A(n) 

> θ

is the error propagation operator. By unrolling this recursion for N steps, the aggregate iterator INθ : L2(Ω) × Hs(Ω) → L2(Ω) is defined as: 

uN = INθ (u(0) , f ) := ENθ u(0) + 

> N−1

X

> i=0

Ei+1  

> θ

B(i) 

> θ

f . (10) where 

ENθ = E(N −1)  

> θ

◦ E (N −2)  

> θ

◦ · · · ◦ E (0)  

> θ

.

This architecture represents a deeply unfolded iterative solver, mapping the spectral initialization to a high-fidelity solution through structured updates. Finally, the complete SINO is defined by the composition of the starter and iterator: 

Gθ = INθ ◦ (Sθ , Id) , (11) where Id represents the identity operator on the Sobolev space. By integrating spectral initialization with iterative refinement, SINO leverages both global frequency-domain priors and local residual-based corrections. The universal approximation property of this framework is established in Theorem 1. 6Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed starter-iterator neural operator. (a) General framework of operator learning, where the input in space is lifted into latent source space X , processed by the neural operator to get the target latent space Y, and projected to true solution space as the output. (b) Framework of our proposed Starter-Iterator Neural Operator (SINO), which incorporates both Starter and Iterator modules, together with lifting, projection, restriction, and prolongation operators. ( c) The starter operator Sθ applies Fourier transform, low-frequency truncation, and inverse transform to capture global patterns. ( d) The iterator operator Iθ enhances local structures via spatial filtering layers and convolutional operators. 

Theorem 1 (Universal approximation property of SINO) . Let s ≥ 0 and C ⊂ Hs(Td; Rdf ) be a compact subset of input functions. Let G : Hs(Td; Rdf ) → L2(Td; Rdu ) be a continuous solution operator associated with the operator equation (4) . Assume that there exist two bounded linear operators 

A : L2(Td; Rdu ) → Hs(Td; Rdf ), B : Hs(Td; Rdf ) → L2(Td; Rdu ),

such that A satisfy the operator equation (4) , and the corresponding preconditioned residual map satisfies 

Id Y − BA < 1,

where Id Y denotes the identity operator on L2(Td; Rdu ). Then, for any ε > 0, there exists a Starter–Iterator Neural Operator (SINO) Gθ of the form (11) , such that Gθ : Hs(Td; Rdf ) → L2(Td; Rdu ) is continuous and satisfies: 

sup  

> f∈C

∥G (f ) − G θ (f )∥L2 < ε. 

72.4. Network Architecture 

Guided by the theoretical framework established in Section 2.3, we implement the Starter-Iterator Neural Operator (SINO) through a hierarchical multiscale architecture—as illustrated in Figure 1(b) and Figure 1(c)—that exploits the duality between spectral global features and spatial local corrections at each discretization scale. Specifically, the network integrates a starter module for spectral initialization, which utilizes learnable Fourier filtering to capture low-rank, long-range dependencies and dominant global dynamics as a high-fidelity initial approximation u(0) , and a com-plementary iterator module for spatial refinement, which employs localized convolutional kernels to approximate the preconditioned residual mapping and capture fine-grained, high-frequency interactions. This hybrid multiresolution structure ensures that the model preserves asymptotic consistency with classical numerical solvers while leveraging the universal approximation power of neural operators. 

Time variable embedding. To handle time-evolutionary data, we incorporate temporal information through a high-dimensional embedding of the time variable t > 0. Following the practice in diffusion models [51], we employ a sinusoidal positional encoding [52] with log-spaced frequencies: 

γ(t) =  sin( ω0t), cos( ω0t), . . . , sin( ωm−1t), cos( ωm−1t), ωm = ω0 2m,

which is then projected by an MLP implemented as linear layer [53] with ReLU activations to obtain a high-dimensional tensor γt ∈ RCt . For any state tensor ut ∈ RB×Ct×H×W at the current time step t, we concatenate it directly with the time embedding tensor γt. We then perform a channel-wise concatenation to form the augmented input f = [ ut; γt],which encapsulates both the instantaneous state and the temporal context. 

Latent space embedding. As illustrated in Figure 1(a), the architecture adheres to the lifting-operator-projection paradigm characteristic of neural operators [33]. The input data f is first lifted into a high-dimensional latent observ-able space X via a pointwise transformation Lθ . Within this continuous latent space, the SINO framework INθ ◦ S θ

evolves the representations toward the target space Y, followed by a projection module Qθ that maps the features back to the physical solution space. Both Lθ and Qθ are implemented as shallow MLPs with ReLU activations, a design that enhances representational capacity while preserving the discretization-invariant properties of the underlying operator. 

Hierarchical Multiscale Framework. Inspired by multigrid correction schemes [54], we adopt a hierarchical multiscale framework to capture the duality between global dynamics and fine-scale structures. At each level s ∈{0, . . . , S − 1}, let f s denote the data (or residual) at that resolution. A coarse approximation is generated and subsequently refined via the Starter-Iterator sequence: 

u(0)  

> s

= Sθ

 f s

, u(N ) 

> s

= INθ

 u(0)  

> s

, f s

, (12) where Sθ and Iθ act as the pre-smoothers of the multiscale system. In the downward pass, the residual rs = f s −Asu(N ) 

> s

is transferred to the next coarser level via a restriction operator Rs implemented as a strided convolution: 

f s+1 = Rsrs.At the coarsest level S, the residual equation is solved approximately. During the subsequent upward pass, the coarse-scale corrections are mapped back to finer resolutions via a prolongation operator Ts implemented as a trans-posed convolution and accumulated into the finer-level state: 

u(N ) 

> s−1

← u(N ) 

> s−1

+ Tsu(N ) 

> s

, s = S − 1, S − 2, . . . , 1.

This V-cycle topology allows coarse-scale layers to efficiently capture long-range, low-frequency interactions with re-duced parameter counts, while fine-scale layers progressively allocate more computational resources to high-frequency details by increasing the number of retained Fourier modes |K s|.The stability of information flow is further ensured through cross-scale skip connections, accelerating convergence as summarized in Algorithm 1. As shown in Figure 4, experimental results on the Darcy flow benchmark [41] demon-strate that the starter-based initialization significantly outperforms conventional random or zero-start strategies, and the integration of the multiscale structure consistently enhances the accuracy and robustness of the operator approxi-mation. 

3. Numerical Results 

3.1. Network Training and Loss Function 

The proposed SINO framework is implemented using PyTorch and optimized via the Adam algorithm, chosen for its robust stochastic gradient-based convergence properties. To accelerate training and navigate complex loss 8Algorithm 1 Data flow in Starter-Iterator Neural Operator 

Require: Input finest force f 0, number of scales S, 

> 1:

for s = 0 → S − 1 do ▷ Downward pass: restriction and coarse solve  

> 2:

Compute linear system: 

u(0)  

> s

= Sθ

 f s

, u(N ) 

> s

= INθ

 u(0)  

> s

, f s

, 

> 3:

Compute residual: rs = f s − Asu(N ) 

> s

, 

> 4:

if s < S − 1 then  

> 5:

Restrict residual to coarse grid: f s+1 = Rs(rs), 

> 6:

Repeat: 

u(0)  

> s+1

= Sθ

 f s+1 

, u(N ) 

> s+1

= INθ

 u(0) 

> s+1

, f s+1 

, 

> 7:

end if  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

for s = S − 1 → 0 do ▷ Upward pass: prolongation and correction  

> 10:

Prolongate coarse solution: ¯u(N ) 

> s

= Ts+1 (u(N )

> s+1

), 

> 11:

Correct fine-level solution: u(N ) 

> s

← u(N ) 

> s

+ ¯ u(N ) 

> s

, 

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

return u(N )0 as the refined fine-scale solution u.landscapes, we employ the OneCycleLR scheduler, which implements a cyclical learning rate policy. Training is executed on high-performance NVIDIA RTX 4090 and Titan RTX GPUs, typically with 500 training epochs to ensure asymptotic stability of the learnable parameters θ.For time-evolutionary equations, we consider a temporal discretization of the domain [0 , T max ] into T uniform intervals, yielding a discrete state sequence {ut}Tt=0 for each trajectory, where t denotes the temporal index. The training dataset D comprises M independent physical realizations (trajectories). To learn the one-step solution oper-ator, we consider the mapping between consecutive temporal states, effectively constructing a total of N = M × T

training pairs by pooling samples across all trajectories and time steps. Let {bu(i) 

> t

, bu(i)

> t+1

}T −1 

> t=0

denote the input-target pairs for the i-th trajectory, where bu(i) 

> t

is the state at the current time level and bu(i) 

> t+1

serves as the ground truth for the subsequent level. The optimal parameters θ are determined by minimizing the aggregate relative mean squared error (RMSE) defined in the L2(Ω) sense: 

min  

> θ

L(θ) := min 

> θ

1

M T  

> T−1

X

> t=0
> M

X

> i=1

Gθ (buit, t ) − buit+1 L2

∥buit+1 ∥L2

. (13) For stationary PDE systems or super-resolution datasets, we consider a training set D = {bf (i)

, bu(i)}Mi=1 consisting of 

M independent data pairs. And bf (i)

typically denotes the discretized forcing term or boundary conditions, while bu(i)

is the latent solution field. The optimal parameters θ are estimated by minimizing the average relative mean squared error (RMSE) in the L2(Ω) sense: 

min  

> θ

L(θ) := min 

> θ

1

M

> M

X

> i=1

Gθ (bf i

) − bui

> L2

∥bui∥L2

.

3.2. Model Evaluation 

Zero-shot resolution generalization . We evaluate the discretization invariance of SINO on the one-dimensional Burg-ers equation using the standard FNO [41] benchmark setting. The task is to learn the operator mapping the initial condition u0 to the solution u1. We train the FNO and SINO with various iterator steps I at resolution R = 256 and directly tested at resolutions R ∈ { 256 , 512 , 1024 , 2048 , 4096 , 8192 } without retraining. As shown in Figure 2, SINO generalizes stably across resolutions. Although the model is trained only at R = 256 , its relative error remains nearly stable when evaluated on grids up to R = 8192 . This confirms that the proposed architecture is not tied to the training discretization. Compared with FNO, SINO achieves lower error at all tested resolutions. The improvement becomes 928 29 210 211 212 213       

> Resolution R
> 10 3
> Relative Error
> Zero-shot Resolution Generalization
> FNO
> SINO I=1
> SINO I=2
> SINO I=4
> SINO I=8
> SINO I=16
> SINO I=32 Figure 2: Relative L2error comparison for zero-shot resolution generalization on the 1D Burgers equation. We trained the FNO and SINO with different iterator steps Ionly on low-resolution data and directly evaluated on higher-resolution test sets without any retraining or fine-tuning.

more pronounced as the number of iterator steps increases. In particular, SINO with iterator steps I = 32 achieves the lowest error and outperforms the FNO baseline by approximately one order of magnitude. A key observation is that increasing the number of iterator steps does not compromise resolution generalization. The error curves for SINO with larger iterative numbers remain stable across test resolutions, indicating that the learned refinement behaves consistently on different grids. This supports our function-space interpretation of SINO: the starter and iterator approximate operators between function spaces, while discretization is used only for numerical realization. 

Hyperparameter selection . We further investigate the influence of architectural hyperparameters on the Darcy-flow benchmark, following the standard FNO [41] experimental setting. In practical numerical PDE solvers, the operators 

A and B typically arise from discretizations of local differential or localized integral operators. These operators natu-rally possess spatial locality, translation equivariance, and sparse interaction patterns. Convolutional neural networks are well aligned with these properties, since they parameterize local stencils with lightweight convolutional kernels, thereby providing an efficient representation of local correction operators. For this reason, in the following experi-ments we use CNN blocks to implement the parameterized iterator in SINO, while the starter is kept as a Fourier-type spectral operator, implemented by an FNO-type spectral block [41]. We first study the effect of the network width under a fixed spectral resolution. Specifically, we fix the number of retained Fourier modes and the number of FNO layers as K = 20 and L = 4 , respectively. We compare the base FNO with SINO using one iterator steps, i.e., I = 1 , while varying the network width and hence the total number of trainable parameters. As shown in Figure 3a, SINO consistently achieves lower relative error than the base FNO across nearly the entire range of parameter budgets. The improvement is particularly clear in the small- and medium-size regimes, where SINO-CNN attains a better error–parameter trade-off. This suggests that, even with only one learned refinement step, the iterator provides an effective correction to the starter prediction and improves parameter efficiency. We then examine the effect of the number of refinement iterations. The Fourier truncation level and network width are fixed, while the number of iterator steps I is varied. Figure 3b reports the relative L2 error, the number of trainable parameters, and the inference time per batch. Increasing I generally reduces the relative L2 error, confirming the effectiveness of the learned fixed-point refinement. The error drops significantly when a small number of iterations is introduced, and the improvement gradually saturates after about I = 12 . Meanwhile, the number of parameters increases only mildly because the iterator is implemented using lightweight CNN blocks. The inference time increases approximately linearly with I, which is expected since the refinement steps are applied sequentially. Nevertheless, for moderate iteration numbers, e.g., I ≤ 10 , the computational overhead remains limited, while the accuracy gain is substantial. These observations indicate that the iterator introduces an effective and controllable accuracy–cost trade-off. 10 (a) Relative error versus model size under fixed Foourier mode K = 20 ,layers L = 4, and iterative number I = 1. SINO-CNN consistently improves over the base FNO across different parameter budgets, indicating better parameter efficiency with the learned CNN iterator.       

> (b) Effect of the number of refinement iterator steps Iunder fixed Fourier modes and network width. Increasing Igenerally reduces the relative L2error, while the number of parameters (M) and inference time (s/batch) grows moderately due to the lightweight CNN-based iterator.

Figure 3: Hyperparameter analysis on the Darcy-flow benchmark. (a) Influence of network width and model size under fixed spectral resolution. The proposed SINO achieves lower relative error than the base FNO for comparable parameter budgets. (b) Influence of the number of learned refinement iterations. Additional iterator steps improve accuracy with only a moderate increase in the number of trainable parameters and inference time, demonstrating the effectiveness and parameter efficiency of the CNN-based iterative refinement. 

3.3. Spectral Phenomenon of SINO 

In the theory of numerical analysis, classical iterative operators like Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel relaxation are renowned for their excellent smoothing properties, effectively attenuating high-frequency error components. Theorem 2(see more details in Appendix A.2) elucidates the spectral properties of the iterative algorithm. However, these opera-tors struggle with low-frequency errors, leading to inefficiencies when used as standalone solvers. Thus, we employ a starter operator to provide a low-frequency approximation of the solution, which accurately captures its global features and large-scale structure. The iterator operator can then concentrate its computational resources on rapidly correct-ing high-frequency components, significantly enhancing the resolution of fine-grained features and accelerating the convergence process. 

Figure 4: Effect of the starter module and multiscale depth on model convergence for operator learning of the Darcy PDE. The left panel compares training dynamics under three initialization strategies: random initialization, zero initialization, and the proposed starter module. Results indicate that random and zero initializations lead to similar convergence behaviors, whereas the starter module substantially accelerates convergence. The right panel investigates the impact of multiscale depth (Scale = 1 , 2, 3) under starter initialization, showing that moderate multiscale depth improves convergence speed, while overly deep architectures may lead to over-parameterization and diminished gains. 

Theorem 2 implies that reducing the low-frequency components of the initial error can significantly accelerate the convergence of stationary iterative methods. To empirically validate this observation, we consider the following 11 Figure 5: Spectral phenomenon of SINO. (a) Training loss curves for both low- and high-frequency components under different initialization frequency combinations. (b) Visualization of the four sets of harmonic functions corresponding to the frequency bands selected in the experiments. (c) Qualitative fitting results at epochs 20, 50, and 80, using three out of the four frequency groups from (b) for initialization. The specific combinations are indicated with colored markers below each column, for example, “Mix-MidHigh” refers to modes 2, 3, and 4. The color coding of the loss curves in (a) corresponds to the column order in (c): green for the first, red for the second, orange for the third, and blue for the fourth. 

one-dimensional Laplace equation with Dirichlet boundary conditions on the interval [0 , 1] :

(

−u′′ (x) = f (x), x ∈ [0 , 1] ,u(0) = u(1) = 0 .

The analytical solution admits a Fourier sine series representation and can therefore be interpreted as a superposition of harmonic modes across different frequency bands. By initializing the iterative procedure with harmonic functions of prescribed frequencies and applying the parameterized iterative network Iθ , we approximate the true solution and examine the spectral behavior of the learned iterator. The numerical results are summarized in Figure 5. As shown in the training loss curves in Figure 5(a), when the initialization suppresses low-frequency error components, both low- and high-frequency errors diminish rapidly and eventually reach minimal values. In contrast, when the initialization suppresses only high-frequency errors, the network tends to first approximate the dominant low-frequency modes, leading to a loss of existing high-frequency information and ultimately yielding inferior convergence performance. This observation is further supported by the reconstructions shown in Figure 5(c). Initializing the iterations with the three lowest frequency modes enables the network to recover the highest frequency features by approximately epoch 20 and nearly complete the fitting process by epoch 80. Conversely, although the alternative initialization strategies introduce high-frequency components at the outset, the network nevertheless begins the approximation from the low-frequency range, causing the high-frequency information to deteriorate around epoch 20 and resulting in 12 Figure 6: (a) Heatmap of training losses with respect to different input and output sequence lengths (Lin , L out ). Three characteristic regions can be observed: the upper-left green triangle corresponds to Lin > L out , representing the case where the network predicts a shorter horizon than the available input (cf. third row in (b)); the lower-right red triangle indicates Lin < L out , where the network is required to extrapolate beyond the input sequence (cf. second row in (b)); and the blue diagonal line represents the matched case Lin = Lout , i.e., one-to-one temporal mapping (cf. first row in (b)). Panel (b) illustrates the corresponding temporal dependency structures under these three regimes. 

slower overall convergence. These findings provide compelling evidence of the importance of initializing with reduced low-frequency error in achieving efficient and accurate iterative refinement. 

3.4. Time Bundling Strategy 

We perform a systematic empirical study within the neural operator framework to investigate the impact of time-bundling strategies and auto-regressive training on the long-term forecasting of time-dependent PDEs. Let Lin and Lout 

denote the number of consecutive input and output time steps, respectively. In this configuration, multiple historical snapshots are concatenated along the channel dimension to form multi-channel input-output pairs, which the model learns to map across temporal windows. During inference, the framework operates in a recursive auto-regressive fashion, where previously predicted time bundles serve as the initialization for subsequent steps to facilitate extended temporal horizons, as illustrated in Figure 6(b). We consider a one-dimensional parabolic PDE with a closed-form solution to minimize the influence of numerical discretization errors: 

∂u ∂t = ∂2u∂x 2 + f (x, t ), (x, t ) ∈ [0 , 1] × [0 , 1] ,u(0 , t ) = u(1 , t ) = 0 , t ∈ [0 , 0.1] .

The ground-truth solution is given by 

u(x, t ) = X

> k∈N+

sin(2 πkx )e−t,

where 1–6 frequencies are randomly selected from the integer range [2 , 24] , and the corresponding source term f (x, t )

is computed from the PDE constraint. We set x ∈ [0 , 1] , t ∈ [0 , 0.1] , nx = 1024 , and nt = 100 , resulting in more than 20,000 distinct frequency combinations for training. As illustrated in Figure 6(a), the training error is substantially reduced when Lin = Lout , indicating that a balanced mapping between input and output facilitates neural network learnability. In contrast, when the number of input steps exceeds the number of outputs, the task resembles compressed sensing, whereas the opposite case corresponds to a generative problem. Both cases impose higher demands on the network’s representational capacity, making them less favorable for PDE-related temporal prediction. 

3.5. Results on Time-evolution Equations 

Time-dependent partial differential equations Eq. (1) are essential mathematical models for describing dynamic processes in physical systems, and their numerical solutions form the foundation of forward problem studies. We 13 Table 2: One-step Error Comparison between our SINO and other established neural operators. 

Model Navier-Stokes Acoustic-Wave Shallow-Water 

ν = 1 e − 3 ν = 1 e − 4 source variable parameter variable DeepONet 1.720e-01 3.823e-01 2.046e-01 6.040e-01 3.000e-03 MgNO 2.200e-03 4.950e-02 1.100e-03 4.220e-02 9.000e-04 FNO 8.000e-04 7.000e-02 1.800e-03 3.730e-02 1.300e-03 

SINO 3.000e-04 8.400e-03 5.000e-04 1.940e-02 6.000e-04 

investigate the performance of SINO on several time-evolution PDEs, including the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation, acoustic wave equation, shallow-water equation, etc. Specifically, we conduct comparative experiments on three representative classes of evolution equations, benchmarking them against three widely used neural operator baselines: FNO [41], DeepONet [37], and MgNO [48]. The relative errors, computed according to Eq. (13), obtained upon convergence of the training process are summarized in Table 2. This table provides a quantitative comparison of the one-step prediction errors of DeepONet, FNO, MgNO, and SINO on the test datasets, clearly demonstrating the superior performance of our method over the baseline approaches. 

Incompressible Navier-Stokes equation. The governing equations for an incompressible viscous fluid flow in vorticity form on the unit torus subjected to an external force field f (x, t ) are expressed as follows: 

∂tω(x, t ) + u(x, t ) · ∇ ω(x, t ) = ν∆ω(x, t ) + f (x, t ), (x, t ) ∈ Ω × (0 , T ] (14) subject to the initial condition ω(x, 0) = ω0(x), where ω(x, t ) is the scalar vorticity field, with ω = ∇ × u in 2D, and 

u(x, t ) is the velocity field that satisfies the incompressibility condition ∇ · u = 0 . The parameter ν is the viscosity coefficient, and f (x, t ) represents the external forcing in the vorticity equation. We train the SINO model to solve Eq. (14), which learns the mapping G between vorticity fields ω(x, t ) at two consecutive time steps during training: 

G : ω(x, t ) 7 → ω(x, t + ∆ t).

We consider two different viscous incompressible flows with viscosities ν = 10 −3 and ν = 10 −4, respectively. Table 2 and Figure 7(a) present a comparison of the one-step prediction errors of DeepONet, FNO, MgNO, and SINO on the test datasets. DeepONet is grounded in basis function representation theory, approximating the solution space by parameterizing both basis functions and coefficients. However, for time-dependent operators, the input and output functions evolve with time, which makes it challenging for DeepONet to maintain accuracy over long temporal horizons. Moreover, many evolution equations develop complex multi-scale behaviors, such as turbulence, at long time scales. Fully connected architectures struggle to capture such localized structures, leading to large single-step errors and, although numerically stable, long-term predictions that deviate from physical consistency. Multi-scale convolutional architectures, such as MgNO, achieve improved PDE solution accuracy, still struggle to learn complex time-varying mappings and exhibit gradually increasing errors in long-term forecasting. In contrast, spectral learning strategies tend to preserve low-frequency structures more effectively, which can help to enhance the stability for long-term predictions. To approximate the solution to the equation, the learned operator is applied autoregressively to the initial condition 

ω0(x) for iterative solving, a process that demands the neural operator possess strong generalization capabilities. The left panel of Figure 7(b) shows the error evolution curves over 50 autoregressive time steps. As shown in Figure 7(b), when the viscosity coefficient is relatively large and the dynamics remain smooth, spectral approaches maintain a sta-ble trend, whereas larger viscosity leads to faster accumulation of prediction error. Our proposed SINO incorporates spectral learning in the initialization step and further refines high-frequency details through parameterized iterative updates, consistently achieving lower single-step error than FNO and offering improved stability in long-term fore-casting. Furthermore, since the condition number of the discretized linear system varies with the viscosity coefficient, the accuracy of neural operators differs across scenarios. A smaller viscosity coefficient leads to a more ill-conditioned system, thereby increasing the difficulty of solving the equations. As SINO is designed based on iterative schemes, its efficiency also declines under such conditions, similar to classical iterative solvers. 

Acoustic Wave Equation. The acoustic wave equation is a fundamental model describing the propagation of sound waves in a medium. It is widely used in geophysics, medical imaging, and non-destructive testing for simulating 14 Figure 7: Results on Navier-Stokes equation and Wave equation. The first and second columns show predicted solutions (first column) and corresponding error maps (second column) for the 2D Navier–Stokes equation with viscosity ν = 1 e − 3, generated by different operator learning methods (one per row). The third and fourth columns display analogous results under reduced viscosity ν = 1 e − 4. The fifth and sixth columns present predictions and residuals for the 2D wave equation with varying source terms. The last row in each block corresponds to the ground truth. Our method consistently exhibits the lowest prediction error and clearest reconstruction across varying physical regimes. The bottom row shows the evolution of relative L2 errors over 50 autoregressive inference steps for the three test scenarios, highlighting the superior long-term accuracy and stability of our model compared to baselines. 

15 acoustic wave fields. The two-dimensional acoustic wave equation with a source term is expressed as 

∂2u(x, t )

∂t 2 = 1

c2(x)

∂2u(x, t )

∂x2 + f (x, t ), x ∈ Ω

with the given boundary conditions 

u(x, 0) = u0(x), x ∈ Ω,∂u(x, 0) 

∂t = 0 x ∈ Ω,

where Ω is the computational region, u(x, t ) denotes the acoustic pressure field, c(x) represents the wave speed in the medium, and f (x, t ) is the external source term. The initial condition is set as u0(x) = f (x, 0) corresponding to a quiescent medium prior to excitation. Absorbing boundary conditions are applied to prevent reflections from the edges of the computational domain. In scenarios where the wave speed distribution c(x) of the medium is fixed and the source location varies, the steadiness of the velocity field enables us to model the transition between successive time steps given a specific source term. The initial condition inherently encodes information about the source function, allowing us to learn a mapping 

G between consecutive temporal states 

G : u(x, t ) 7 → u(x, t + ∆ t).

As illustrated in Table 2 and Figure 7, our results are consistent with the findings for the Navier-Stokes equations, with our SINO demonstrating the highest precision in both single-step predictions and iterative rollouts. The starter-iterator architecture effectively serves as a robust framework for operator learning, demonstrating competitive performance across different simulation scenarios. In scenarios where the wave speed distribution c(x) varies while the source location remains fixed, the learning task becomes a more challenging mapping 

G :  u(x, t ); c(x) 7 → u(x, t + ∆ t).

The velocity distribution c(x) is obtained from simulated breast tissue slice data [55], and the training dataset is generated using a 500 kHz ultrahigh-frequency wave (see Appendix D for additional details on data generation). We explore the application of neural operators to the simulation of ultrahigh-frequency acoustic waves, demonstrating their potential in this challenging regime. The one-step prediction results are summarized in Table 2, where our proposed SINO consistently achieves the highest accuracy among all baselines. Furthermore, additional visualizations (as shown in Figure E.13) illustrate that our approach remains stable over long-term propagation, producing physically meaningful pressure fields. In contrast, conventional operator learning methods tend to accumulate errors rapidly, resulting in predictions that lose physical interpretability. This highlights the superior temporal stability of our method. 

Longer horizon inference. To further validate the temporal stability of our method, we conduct an additional experiment on the one-dimensional advection–diffusion equation from PDEBench [56]. The governing equation is given by 

∂tu(t, x ) + β∂ xu(t, x ) = 0 , x ∈ (0 , 1) , t ∈ (0 , 2] , (15) with the initial condition 

u(0 , x ) = u0(x), x ∈ (0 , 1) , (16) where β denotes a constant advection speed. The problem is considered under periodic boundary conditions. For this equation, the solution corresponds to a translation of the initial profile, 

u(t, x ) = u0(x − βt ),

which makes it a suitable benchmark for evaluating whether a learned model can preserve transported structures over long temporal horizons. Following the data-generation protocol of PDE Bench [56], the initial condition is constructed as a superposition of sinusoidal waves, 

u0(x) = 

> N

X

> i=1

Ai sin( kix + ϕi), (17) 16 where ki = 2 πn i/L x is the wave number, ni is randomly sampled from [1 , n max ], Ai is uniformly sampled from 

[0 , 1] , and ϕi is randomly sampled from (0 , 2π). The reference numerical solutions are generated using a second-order upwind finite-difference scheme in both space and time. We train the SINO with other Competitive models and report the relative L2 error along a 100 -step prediction horizon. As shown in Figure. E.14, the prediction error increases with time for all methods, which is expected for autore-gressive rollouts due to accumulated numerical and modeling errors. Nevertheless, SINO consistently achieves the lowest relative L2 error over the entire horizon. Compared with FNO, SINO exhibits a significantly slower error growth rate, indicating better stability in long-time propagation. Compared with MgNO, SINO also maintains a clear advantage across most rollout steps. These results suggest that the proposed starter–iterator structure is effective not only for short-term operator approximation but also for mitigating error accumulation in long-horizon time-dependent PDE prediction. 

Ablation study. The shallow-water equations, derived as a depth-averaged approximation of the Navier-Stokes equations, offer a traditional framework for modeling large-scale geophysical flows, including ocean currents, tidal waves, and atmospheric circulation. These equations address the horizontal motion of a thin fluid layer, assuming the horizontal dimensions significantly exceed the vertical depth. In two spatial dimensions with external forces, the system is expressed as follows: 



∂(hu )

∂t + ∂∂x 

 hu 2 + 12 gh2 + ∂(huv )

∂y = −gh ∂b

∂x + F x(x, y, t ),∂(hv )

∂t + ∂(huv )

∂x + ∂∂y 

 hv 2 + 12 gh2 = −gh ∂b

∂y + F y (x, y, t ),

subject to the conservation law 

∂h

∂t + ∂(hu )

∂x + ∂(hv )

∂y = 0 ,

where h(x, y, t ) is the fluid depth, and u(x, y, t ) and v(x, y, t ) are the horizontal velocity components in the x and 

y directions, respectively. The constant g denotes the gravitational acceleration, and b describes a spatially varying bathymetry. The terms F x(x, y, t ) and F y (x, y, t ) represent external forces in the two horizontal directions. Our aim is to learn the mappings between consecutive time steps for the velocity variables u and v, respectively 

G : u(x, y, t ) 7 → u(x, y, t + ∆ t) and G : v(x, y, t ) 7 → v(x, y, t + ∆ t).

We further perform ablation studies and extrapolation evaluations using a simplified format of the Navier-Stokes equations: the shallow-water equations (SWE), exploring the influence of three strategies on the performance of our model. Specifically, we examine three key components: the starter module S, the iterator module I, and the multi-scale structure M . The ablation results are summarized in Table 3, where we report the relative L2 error of the model predictions at the 10th, 20th, 30th, 40th, and 50th time steps.         

> Table 3: Ablation studies on the shallow-water equation, where Sdenotes the starter module, Idenotes the iterator module, and Mdenotes the multi-scale framework. We report the relative L2error at the 10th, 20th, 30th, 40th, and 50th inference steps.

S I M T=10 T=20 T=30 T=40 T=50 

✓ 9.094e-04 2.097e-03 8.637e-03 2.368e-02 5.259e-02 

✓ ✓ 1.878e-03 2.679e-03 3.600e-03 4.565e-03 5.848e-03 

✓ ✓ 2.146e-03 3.300e-03 4.662e-03 7.663e-03 1.612e-02 

✓ ✓ 4.087e-04 1.263e-03 2.726e-03 4.511e-03 6.801e-03 

✓ ✓ ✓ 2.634e-04 4.471e-04 5.775e-04 6.551e-04 7.593e-04 

The one-step error presented in Table 2 further attests to the consistent performance of our SINO on the shallow-water equations. Additionally, the residual maps (see in Figure 8) demonstrate that SINO effectively preserves high-frequency components in the solution during rollout, maintaining consistently small residuals over extended prediction horizons. Although the training process is confined to learning the mapping G for u between adjacent time steps, the proposed operator exhibits robust generalization to long-term autoregressive inference, demonstrating superior predictive accuracy and stability. Furthermore, we conducted an ablation study of SINO on the shallow-water equation dataset (see Appendix D for details). The results indicate that incorporating both the starter operator Sθ and iterator 17 Figure 8: Visualization of residual maps between predicted and ground-truth solutions of the shallow-water equation. Rows 1–4 correspond the  

> residual map to DeepONet, MgNO, FNO, and our proposed method, respectively, while row 5 shows the ground-truth solutions. Each column represents autoregressive rollout results at time steps 1, 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50.

operator Iθ significantly reduces prediction error. This finding underscores that frequency-domain initialization and spatiotemporal residual iteration play complementary roles in capturing the underlying system dynamics. From Table 3, we observe several key trends. First, incorporating both starter operator S and iterator operator I

learning significantly reduces the prediction error compared to using either strategy alone, indicating their comple-mentary roles in capturing the underlying dynamics. Second, the multi-scale framework M further enhances model performance, particularly at later time steps (T=40 and T=50), suggesting its effectiveness in mitigating error accumu-lation during autoregressive inference. The combination of all three components achieves the lowest relative L2 error across all time steps, highlighting the importance of integrating spectral, spatiotemporal, and multi-scale representa-tions to improve the long-term stability and accuracy of operator learning models. 

3.6. Application on Super-Resolution Imaging 

Super-resolution microscopy (SRM) stands as a pivotal advancement in life sciences imaging, empowering re-searchers to transcend the optical diffraction limit and explore subcellular structures with unprecedented clarity. By surpassing the conventional Rayleigh criterion, SRM techniques such as stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (STORM) [57], photoactivated localization microscopy (PALM) [58], and structured illumination microscopy (SIM) [59] offer profound insights into biological processes at the nanoscale. Theoretically, the fluorescence microscopy 18 imaging process can be modeled as a spatial convolution between the high-resolution distribution of fluorophores and the system’s point spread function (PSF), with measurement noise posing a significant challenge to the fidelity of the acquired data. The degradation process of high-resolution fluorophores can be described by the integral Eq. (2). The high-resolution fluorophore distribution is represented in vector form as xsr ∈ Rn, and the observed low-resolution data is denoted as xlr ∈ Rm. Due to the reduction in resolution, it generally holds that m < n . The corresponding image reconstruction problem can be formulated as the following linear inverse problem: 

xlr = Axsr + η, (18) where A ∈ Rm×n is the imaging operator, each row of which is constructed by shifting and downsampling the point spread function (PSF). Since the system is underdetermined, solving Eq. (18) is an ill-posed problem, which can be addressed using operator learning method by 

G : xlr 7 → xsr .

We utilize the publicly available BioSR dataset [60] for super-resolution tasks, which comprises over 2,200 paired low-resolution and high-resolution images acquired through a multimodal structured illumination microscopy (SIM) system. The dataset includes four types of intracellular structures with increasing structural complexity: clathrin-coated pits (CCPs), microtubules (MTs), F-actin filaments, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER). As the resolution be-comes higher, the reconstruction challenges also increase. For each structural type, approximately 50 regions of interest (ROIs) were captured under nine different excitation intensities. The corresponding raw SIM images were processed to generate paired diffraction-limited wide-field (WF) images and high-resolution SIM reconstructions. To ensure data quality, samples of F-actin, MTs, and CCPs were imaged from fixed cells, whereas ER data were acquired from live cells due to fixation-induced artifacts.   

> Table 4: Quantitative comparison of the proposed SINO method and the baseline RCAN method on the CCPs, ER, MTs, and F-actin datasets for the super-resolution task. The reported metrics include MSE, PSNR, and SSIM. The best results are highlighted with a gray background.

Dataset MSE PSNR SSIM RCAN SINO RCAN SINO RCAN SINO CCPs 4.600e-05 1.000e-06 44.95 65.73 0.9966 0.9996 ER 5.750e-04 9.600e-05 33.23 41.35 0.9272 0.9654 MTs 6.070e-04 8.400e-05 32.70 41.11 0.9103 0.9689 F-actin 9.690e-04 8.800e-05 30.72 40.75 0.8596 0.9712 

We compared the performance of our proposed method against two widely used baseline models for SIM super-resolution tasks: the Deep Residual Channel Attention Network (RCAN) [61] and the Deep Fourier Channel Attention Network (DFCAN) [60]. As shown in Figure 9, our method achieved reconstruction results highly consistent with the Ground Truth (GT) high-resolution images across all four datasets. Residual maps further confirmed that the recon-struction errors contain only minimal structural artifacts, indicating that high-precision neural operators play a critical role in accurately reconstructing fine structures. Furthermore, by comparing the intensity line profiles extracted along the red arrows in Figure 9(c), it can be observed that our method outperforms the two baseline models in preserving edge sharpness and local contrast. In addition, the box plots of the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) for CCP and ER reconstructions in Figure 9(d) demonstrate that our method significantly surpasses the baseline approaches in both re-construction accuracy and stability. In particular, the PSNR comparison results for CCPs and ER reveal that the fitting accuracy of the neural network decreases when the training datasets have higher resolutions. We analyzed the training and validation dynamics of the reconstruction models across four datasets (shown as Figure 10). As the proportion of high-frequency components in the data increases, the fitting accuracy of neural network models progressively de-clines. Owing to its enhanced precision, particularly in capturing high-frequency details, our method achieves Mean Squared Error (MSE) values that are two orders of magnitude lower than DFCAN and one order of magnitude lower than RCAN (shown as table 4). 

3.7. Application on Weather Forecasting 

Weather forecasting relies on intricate mathematical and dynamic models that integrate multidisciplinary knowl-edge, including atmospheric physics, chemistry, and fluid dynamics. At the heart of the prediction system are numeri-19 Figure 9: Quantitative and qualitative evaluation of ×2 super-resolution performance across multiple datasets. (a) Representative visual comparisons of ×2 super-resolution results from different methods on datasets with increasing structural complexity from top to bottom. For each dataset, columns show the widefield (WF) input, predictions from DFCAN, RCAN, and our method, followed by the ground truth structured illumination microscopy (GT-SIM) image. ( b) Residual error maps for DFCAN, RCAN, and our method, computed as the absolute pixel-wise difference from the corresponding GT-SIM images. (c) Intensity line profiles extracted along the white arrowheads indicated in the WF input images, comparing signal fidelity for DFCAN (green), RCAN (red), GT-SIM (white), and WF (blue) across all four datasets. ( d) Box plots showing the distribution of PSNR values for DFCAN, RCAN, and our method on all four datasets. Each box indicates the interquartile range, with the median marked by a horizontal line. 

20 Figure 10: Visualization of training dynamics on four datasets. The x-axis represents the number of epoch and the y-axis the error in log scale. 

cal weather prediction (NWP) models, which are grounded in fundamental fluid dynamics and thermodynamics prin-ciples and leverage advanced computer simulation technologies to predict atmospheric conditions. Recently, artificial intelligence-driven weather forecasting methods have made significant strides, primarily utilizing large foundational models that exploit massive datasets and robust computing resources [62, 63]. However, these complex systems often demand substantial infrastructure investments, limiting their broader application. Recent studies [64, 65] have intro-duced a variety of efficient and data-conserving approaches that require minimal input variables, sometimes relying on a single key atmospheric parameter, to achieve high-accuracy short-term predictions. Yet, enhancing the accuracy of medium-to-long-range forecasts remains one of the most cutting-edge and challenging issues in numerical weather prediction. The numerical weather prediction (NWP) problem can be mathematically formulated as an initial value problem governed by a system of partial differential equations (PDEs). We begin with the thermodynamic energy equation, which is derived from the first law of thermodynamics and forms an intrinsically coupled system with the momentum, continuity, and equation of state that describe atmospheric dynamic processes. Under the pressure coordinate system and assuming an ideal gas, the evolution of the temperature field is governed by the following equation: 

cp

 ∂T

∂t + v · ∇ T + ω ∂T

∂p 



− RT

p ω = Q, (19) where T denotes temperature (K), v = ( u, v ) is the horizontal wind velocity (m/s), ω = Dp/Dt is the vertical velocity in pressure coordinates (Pa/s), cp is the specific heat capacity at constant pressure (J/(kg·K)), R is the gas constant for dry air (J/(kg·K)), p is pressure (Pa), and Q represents diabatic heating due to radiation, latent heat release, or turbulent 21 Figure 11: The comparison of Weather prediction results. (a) Monthly prediction loss over the year 2018 comparing the proposed surrogate model (red) with the baseline model (black); (b) prediction loss curves for June; (c) visualization of selected time steps in June, where the first row shows the ground truth, the second row the predictions from SINO, the third row the predictions from the baseline model, and the fourth and fifth rows the residuals with respect to the ground truth for SINO and the baseline, respectively. 

22 fluxes (J/(kg·s)). This formulation highlights the interplay between temperature and other prognostic variables such as velocity, pressure, and diabatic processes. The temperature evolution Eq. (19) can be discretized to yield a stepwise recursive relation for the temperature field: 

G : T (x, t ) 7 → T (x, t + ∆ t),

which serves as the foundation for forward integration of prognostic temperature variables in numerical weather pre-diction models. To construct a data-driven forecasting model, we approximate the evolution operator G using a neural operator. We use the publicly available WeatherBench [66], which provides a comprehensive set of meteorological param-eters across time. We focus on the near-surface air temperature at 2 meters (T2m) as our target variable, a widely recognized metric for assessing surface climate variability and thermally significant conditions relevant to human activities. Our analysis uses hourly T2m data with a temporal resolution of ∆t = 6 hours. Data from the period 2010–2016 are used for training, observations from 2017 are used for validation, and data from 2018 are reserved for inference testing. The data are regridded to a spatial resolution of 128 × 64 , corresponding to a uniform horizontal grid spacing of 2.825 ◦ in both longitude and latitude. We select the CNN model from WeatherBench [66] as the baseline method and conduct a numerical visualization comparison with our proposed method based on autoregressive inference over a one-month horizon, starting from the initial data of each month. Figure 11(a) presents a comparison between the predictions and ground truth obtained from both methods using the surrogate model for 12 consecutive months of autoregressive inference, along with the corresponding relative mean squared error curves. The analysis results indicate that the CNN method exhibits a significant error accumulation effect during long-term forecasting, with pronounced error growth between May and September. In contrast, our method does not show significant error accumulation throughout the entire forecasting period. Figure 11(b) further displays the error progression curve for June, demonstrating that our method not only achieves a significantly lower initial error than the CNN baseline but also maintains more stable error characteristics throughout the inference process. Figure 11(c) visualizes the predicted global temperature fields and corresponding residual maps at 12:00 UTC on June 1, 10, 20, and 30, with the relative L 2 error values annotated above each subplot. Quantitative analysis reveals that our method reduces the prediction error by approximately 30% compared to the CNN method at the initial stage, and this performance advantage continues to expand over time, exceeding a 60% error reduction by the end of June. 

4. Conclusion and Future Works 

In this study, we presented the Starter-Iterator Neural Operator (SINO), a framework grounded in the principles of classical iterative analysis. The proposed operator architecture integrates two complementary functional compo-nents: a starter module operating in the frequency domain to provide a high-fidelity estimation of the target solution’s low-frequency spectrum, and an iterative module designed to refine high-frequency structural details through learn-able parametric recursions. Consistent with the spectral properties of iterative solvers, the starter module effectively suppresses the low-frequency components of the initial error, thereby accelerating the contraction rate of the iterator and enhancing overall approximation accuracy. The primary contribution of SINO lies in the seamless integration of these components into an end-to-end differentiable, adaptive numerical solver capable of addressing both forward and inverse problems. By unifying initialization and refinement within a purely neural framework, SINO overcomes the modular decoupling inherent in traditional iterative methods, significantly boosting computational efficiency without sacrificing generalization. Our empirical evaluations across diverse scientific computing tasks demonstrate that SINO consistently outperforms existing benchmarks. Furthermore, numerical analysis confirms that the synergy between low-frequency initialization and parameterized iteration effectively captures multiscale features, particularly ensuring robust stability in autoregressive temporal tasks. We demonstrate SINO’s applicability across various scientific computing tasks, including forward prediction and inverse inference. Our experimental results consistently show that SINO outperforms existing baselines in accuracy and efficiency, underscoring the potential of operator learning frameworks to advance scientific computing. In addition, our numerical studies show that initializing with low-frequency information, combined with a parameterized iterative scheme, effectively extracts high-frequency features. In temporal tasks, SINO demonstrates exceptional stability as an autoregressive operator during iterative computation. 23 Our analysis identifies three critical factors influencing SINO’s performance: first, at the data level, data fidelity is paramount, as measurement errors and high structural complexity in acquisition processes—particularly in super-resolution tasks—correlate with larger noise levels that exacerbate convergence errors as shown in Fig. 10; second, at the computational modeling level, the learning precision is intrinsically linked to system conditioning, where the ill-conditioning of the underlying system, such as in Navier-Stokes simulations with a decreasing viscosity coefficient 

ν, significantly heightens the difficulty of operator approximation as detailed in Table 2; and third, the model-physics gap arising from discrepancies between the neural operator and the latent physical system introduces modeling bi-ases, where the simplification of complex inter-variable interactions can lead to cumulative errors during long-term simulations. Looking forward, we aim to augment neural operator performance through three primary avenues. First, at the data level, we will employ higher-order, structure-preserving numerical methods to generate high-fidelity datasets. Second, we plan to develop parameterized iterators based on high-order iterative schemes (e.g., Krylov-subspace-inspired architectures) to improve accuracy in ill-conditioned regimes. Finally, we intend to extend the SINO framework to characterize complex multi-variable interactions, thereby enhancing the representational capacity of neural operators for sophisticated multi-physics systems. 

Acknowledgment 

We would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive suggestions, which helped us improve the theoretical analysis. The work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC T2541053). 

Appendix A. Theoretical evaluation 

Appendix A.1. Proof of Theorem 1 

We first establish the following supporting definitions and lemmas to facilitate the proof of the Universal Approx-imation Theorem 1. 

Definition 1 (Fourier Projection and Truncation Operator) . Let Ω ⊂ Rd be a bounded Lipschitz domain and u ∈

L2(Ω) be represented by its Fourier series 

u(x) = X

> k∈Zd

bukei⟨k,x ⟩.

The Fourier projection operator PK : L2(Ω) 7 → L2(Ω) is defined as: 

PK u := X

> |k|∞<K

bukei⟨k,x ⟩,

where K ∈ N+ is the frequency truncation threshold. Given a continuous operator G : Hs(Ω) 7 → L2(Ω) , its Fourier truncation , denoted by GK , is defined as: 

GK (f ) := PK G(PK f ). (A.1) 

Definition 2 (Contraction Operator) . A linear operator O : H 7 → H on a Hilbert space H is a contraction if there exists a constant q ∈ (0 , 1) such that: 

∥O v∥H ≤ q∥v∥H, ∀v ∈ H .

In the context of iterative schemes, q governs the geometric convergence rate of the error propagation. 

Lemma 1 (Approximation via fixed-point iteration) . Let A : L2(Ω) 7 → Hs(Ω) be a bounded invertible linear op-eratorsatisfying the equation Au = f for u ∈ L2(Ω) and f ∈ Hs(Ω) . Assume there exists a bounded linear preconditioning operator B : Hs(Ω) → L2(Ω) such that the error transition operator E = Id Y − BA is a contraction on L2(Ω) with a contraction constant q ∈ (0 , 1) . For a given frequency truncation K ∈ N+, let the initial guess be 

u(0) = GK f and the sequence {u(n)}n∈N be generated by the iterative scheme u(n+1) = I(u(n), f ) as defined in Eq. 7. Then, for any ϵ > 0, there exists an N ∈ N such that 

∥u − u(N )∥L2 < ϵ. 

24 Proof. Let e(n) := u − u(n) denote the error at the n-th iteration. From the iterative relation and the identity Bf =

BA u, we have: 

e(n+1) = u −



Eu(n) + Bf



= (Id Y − BA )( u − u(n)) = Ee(n).

By recursive application, it follows that 

e(N ) = (Id Y − BA )N e(0) .

Given that E is a contraction, we obtain the bound: 

∥e(N )∥L2 ≤ qN ∥e(0) ∥L2 .

The initial error e(0) = u − G K f is bounded, as u ∈ L2(Ω) and GK is a bounded operator from Hs(Ω) to L2(Ω) .Since q ∈ (0 , 1) , lim N →∞ qN = 0 . Consequently, for any ϵ > 0, we can choose N > log q (ϵ/ ∥e(0) ∥L2 ) such that 

qN ∥e(0) ∥L2 < ϵ , which completes the proof. Note that the contraction property q < 1 is consistent with the assumptions in deep equilibrium models [67, 68]. This property ensures that the iterative refinement is inherently stable and convergent within the continuous functional space, thereby bypassing any dependency on finite-dimensional algebraic properties. Furthermore, the condition q < 1

implies that the error sequence is uniformly bounded by its initial state: 

∥e(n)∥L2 ≤ qn∥e(0) ∥L2 ≤ ∥ e(0) ∥L2 , ∀n ∈ N+.

By the triangle inequality, the iterative sequence {u(n)} is also uniformly bounded: 

∥u(n)∥L2 ≤ ∥ u∥L2 + ∥e(n)∥L2 ≤ ∥ u∥L2 + ∥e(0) ∥L2 , ∀n ∈ N+.

Lemma 2 (Universal Approximation Property for Iterator Operator) . Let the iteration operator IN satisfy the condi-tions in Lemma 1. For any ϵ > 0 and N ∈ N+, there exist fully connected neural networks (FCNs) A(n) 

> θ

and B(n) 

> θ

that construct a neural iterator INθ : L2(Ω) → L2(Ω) such that: 

sup  

> f∈Hs(Ω)

∥I N (GK f ; f ) − I Nθ (GK f ; f )∥ < ϵ 

where K is a compact subset of Hs(Ω) . The neural iterator INθ is defined by the composition of N unrolled steps: 

INθ (GK f ; f ) :=  

> N−1

Y

> i=0

(Id Y − B (i) 

> θ

A(i) 

> θ

)GK f + 

> N−1

X

> j=0
> j

Y

> i=0

(Id Y − B (i) 

> θ

A(i) 

> θ

)B(0)  

> θ

f .

This is equivalent to the recursive scheme: 

u(n+1)  

> θ

= u(n) 

> θ

+ B(n) 

> θ

(f − A (n) 

> θ

u(n) 

> θ

), n = 0 , . . . , N − 1.

Proof. Let u(n) be the exact iteration defined by u(n+1) = u(n) +B(f −A u(n)) and u(n) 

> θ

be the neural approximation. Define the error e(n) := u(n) − u(n) 

> θ

. The error evolution is given by: 

e(n+1) = u(n+1) − u(n+1) 

> θ

= e(n) + B(f − A u(n)) − B (n) 

> θ

(f − A (n) 

> θ

u(n) 

> θ

)= e(n) + ( B − B (n) 

> θ

)f + ( B(n) 

> θ

A(n) 

> θ

u(n) 

> θ

− BA u(n))= e(n) + ( B − B θn )f + ( B(n) 

> θ

A(n) 

> θ

u(n) 

> θ

− B (n) 

> θ

Au(n) + B(n) 

> θ

Au(n) − BA u(n))= (Id Y − B (n) 

> θ

A(n) 

> θ

)e(n) + ( B − B (n) 

> θ

)( f − A u(n)) + B(n) 

> θ

(A(n) 

> θ

− A )u(n).

Taking the L2 norm on both sides and applying the triangle inequality: 

∥e(n+1) ∥ ≤ ∥ Id Y − B (n) 

> θ

A(n) 

> θ

∥∥ e(n)∥ + ∥B − B (n) 

> θ

∥∥ f − A u(n)∥ + ∥B (n) 

> θ

∥∥A (n) 

> θ

− A∥∥ u(n)∥. (A.2) 25 By the Universal Approximation Theorem for operators on compact sets [69], for any δ > 0, there exist neural networks A(n) 

> θ

and B(n) 

> θ

such that ∥A − A (n) 

> θ

∥ ≤ δ and ∥B − B (n) 

> θ

∥ ≤ δ. Consequently, B(n) 

> θ

is bounded such that 

∥B (n) 

> θ

∥ ≤ ∥B∥ + δ. The perturbed transition operator satisfies: 

∥Id Y − B (n) 

> θ

A(n) 

> θ

∥ = ∥Id Y − BA + BA − B (n) 

> θ

A + B(n) 

> θ

A − B (n) 

> θ

A(n) 

> θ

∥≤ ∥ Id Y − BA∥ + ∥B − B (n) 

> θ

∥∥A∥ + ∥B (n) 

> θ

∥∥A − A (n) 

> θ

∥≤ q + ( ∥A∥ + ∥B (n) 

> θ

∥)δ

≤ q + ( ∥A∥ + ∥B∥ + δ) × δ := qθ .

Since q ∈ (0 , 1) , we can choose δ sufficiently small such that qθ < 1.From the boundedness of A and the convergence result of Lemma 1, the sequences {u(n)} and {f − A u(n)} are uniformly bounded for all n ∈ { 0, . . . , N }. Thus, we define a uniform constant C > 0 independent of n and θ such that: 

C := max {∥ f − A u(n)∥, ∥B (n) 

> θ

∥, ∥u(n) 

> θ

∥} , ∀n ∈ N.

Substituting these into Eq. (A.2), we obtain the linear recurrence: 

∥e(n+1) ∥ ≤ qθ ∥e(n)∥ + 2 Cδ. 

Given e(0) = 0, iterating this relation yields: 

∥e(N )∥ ≤  

> N−1

X

> k=0

qkθ (2 Cδ ) = 2 Cδ 1 − qNθ

1 − qθ

< 2Cδ 

1 − qθ

.

For any ϵ > 0, by choosing δ < ϵ(1 −qθ )2C , we arrive at ∥e(N )∥ < ϵ , which completes the proof. 

Remark 1. While Lemma 2 employs the universal approximation property of fully connected neural networks (FCNs) to establish a theoretical lower bound for approximation within L2 or Hs topologies over compact subsets, the de-ployment of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in SINO is rigorously necessitated by the structural properties of partial differential equations (PDEs). Given that the operators A and B typically discretize local differential or integral operators, their inherent spatial locality, translation equivariance, and multiscale interactions align precisely with the inductive biases of CNNs. Specifically, through weight-sharing and sparse connectivity, CNNs impose an efficient regularization that constrains the hypothesis space to mappings respecting the underlying grid geometry, thereby ensuring the approximation of bounded linear operators while significantly enhancing parameter efficiency and generalization stability over unstructured FCNs. 

Lemma 3 (Universal Approximation Property for Starter Operator) . Let G : Hs(Td; Rdf ) → L2(Td; Rdu ) for some 

s ≥ 0 be a continuous operator. For any K ∈ N+, let GK be the Fourier truncated operator defined in Eq. (A.1) . If 

C ⊂ Hs(Td; Rdf ) is a compact set, then for any ϵ > 0, there exists a starter module Sθ such that: 

sup  

> f∈C

∥G K (f ) − S θ (f )∥L2 ≤ ϵ. 

The detailed proof, leveraging the approximation power of Fourier Neural Operators, can be found in [70]. Building upon the convergence analysis and the existence results provided in the previous sections, we now es-tablish the primary approximation theorem for the SINO architecture. This proof integrates the frequency-truncation initialization bound from Lemma 3 with the iterative refinement stability and neural emulation guarantees derived in Lemmas 1 and 2, respectively. Consequently, the formal proof of Theorem 1 is detailed as follows. 

Proof of Theorem 1. For any f ∈ C ⊂ Hs(Td), let u := G(f ) be the exact solution. We decompose the total approximation error of the SINO framework into three components: 

∥G (f ) − G θ (f )∥L2 = ∥u − I N (GK f ; f ) + IN (GK f ; f ) − I Nθ (GK f ; f ) + INθ (GK f ; f ) − I Nθ (Sθ (f ); f )∥L2

≤ ∥ u − I N (GK f ; f )∥L2

| {z }

> (I)

+ ∥I N (GK f ; f ) − I Nθ (GK f ; f )∥L2

| {z }

> (II)

+ ∥I Nθ (GK f ; f ) − I Nθ (Sθ (f ); f )∥L2

| {z }

> (III)

.

26 By Lem. 1, for any ϵ > 0, there exists N sufficiently large such that 

∥u − I N (GK f , f )∥L2 < ϵ

3 .

By Lem. 2, we can choose appropriate iterator INθ

∥I N (GK f ; f ) − I Nθ (GK f ; f )∥L2 < ϵ

3 .

By Lem. 3, there exists a starter operator Sθ such that 

sup  

> f∈C

∥G K f − S θ (f )∥L2 < ϵ

3 .

As the iterator INθ is a contraction linear mapping, we can further get 

∥I Nθ (GK f ; f ) − I Nθ (Sθ (f ); f )∥L2 < ϵ

3

Combining the above three estimates yields, we finally get 

sup  

> f∈K

∥G (f ) − G θ (f )∥L2 < ϵ, 

which completes the proof. 

Remark 2 (Difference between our proof and [70]) . It is important to clarify that the universal approximation capability of SINO is not merely inherited from its FNO-based starter module. In the classical FNO framework [70], approximation accuracy is strictly limited by the choice of the spectral truncation level K, as the model’s expressivity is essentially determined by its precision in approximating the finite-dimensional projection operator GK . In this work, Lemma 3 is employed solely to ensure that the starter operator provides a valid spectral initialization. In contrast, SINO decouples the functions of initialization and operator refinement: while the starter module is only required to capture the coarse spectral distribution, the introduced iterator module progressively compensates for the residual between GK and the target operator G through iterative evolution. Consequently, the approximation performance of SINO stems from the synergistic effect of spectral initialization and iterative correction, rather than the contribution of a single module. The numerical experiments in Section 3.2 further confirm that this collaborative mechanism significantly outperforms traditional monolithic operator architectures in both accuracy and convergence efficiency. 

Remark 3 (Extension to Sobolev target spaces) . For clarity of exposition, Theorem 1 is initially established for tar-get operators mapping into L2(Td; Rdu ), yet this result generalizes naturally to target spaces Hs′

(Td; Rdu ) for any 

s′ ≥ 0. Following a lifting argument analogous to that in [70], since the Fourier basis constitutes a complete orthonor-mal system across the scale of Sobolev spaces, the approximation in Hs′

can be controlled by L2 approximation via the spectral equivalence of Sobolev norms. Given that the SINO architecture—comprising linear operations and spec-tral convolutions—inherently preserves the regularity of the underlying distributions and acts as a bounded operator between corresponding Sobolev spaces, the emulation error established in the L2 sense consistently translates to the 

Hs′

setting. Consequently, provided the target operator G : Hs(Td) → Hs′

(Td) is continuous with respect to the associated Sobolev topologies, SINO maintains the universal approximation property, achieving arbitrary precision ϵ

over any compact subset C ⊂ Hs(Td) for all s, s ′ ≥ 0.Appendix A.2. Spectral Property of Fixed-Point Iterations for Operator Equations 

Theorem 2 (Spectral Property of Fixed-Point Iterations) . Let X and Y be Hilbert spaces, and let A ∈ L (X , Y) be a bounded linear operator. Consider the operator equation Au = f for f ∈ Y . Let u∗ ∈ X denote an exact solution such that Au∗ = f . Define a stationary fixed-point iteration by 

u(n+1) = u(n) + B(f − A u(n)), n ≥ 0,

where B ∈ L (Y, X ) is a bounded linear correction operator. Let E := Id X − BA be the error propagation operator. Assume that E admits a spectral decomposition with eigenpairs {(ηj , ϕj )}∞

> j=1

, where the eigenvectors {ϕj }∞ 

> j=1

form an orthonormal basis for X .

27 If the initial error e(0) = u(0) − u∗ has the expansion e(0) = P∞ 

> j=1

αj ϕj , then the error at the n-th iteration satisfies 

e(n) =

> ∞

X

> j=1

αj ηnj ϕj ,

where the series converges in the norm topology of X . Consequently, the j-th spectral component of the error, given by the projection ⟨e(n), ϕj ⟩X , scales by a factor of ηnj . The asymptotic decay rate of each component is determined by |ηj |; components with |ηj | ≈ 1 exhibit slow convergence, while those with |ηj | ≪ 1 decay rapidly. Proof. Let e(n) := u(n) − u∗ be the error at iteration n. By the definition of the fixed-point iteration and the identity 

Au∗ = f , we have: 

u(n+1) = u(n) + B(f − A u(n))

and 

u∗ = u∗ + B(f − A u∗).

Subtracting the latter from the former yields the error recurrence: 

e(n+1) = u(n+1) − u∗

= u(n) − u∗ − BA 



u(n) − u∗

= (Id X − BA ) e(n)

= Ee(n).

By induction, it follows that e(n) = Ene(0) for any n ∈ N.Given the spectral decomposition assumption, Eϕj = ηj ϕj implies that ϕj is an eigenvector of the power operator 

En with eigenvalue ηnj , i.e., Enϕj = ηnj ϕj . Substituting the expansion of the initial error e(0) = P∞ 

> j=1

αj ϕj into the expression for e(n), and invoking the linearity and continuity of the bounded operator En, we obtain: 

e(n) = En ∞X

> j=1

αj ϕj



=

> ∞

X

> j=1

αj Enϕj =

> ∞

X

> j=1

αj ηnj ϕj ,

where the summation converges in the norm of X . Since {ϕj }j≥1 is an orthonormal basis, the j-th spectral component of the error is ⟨e(n), ϕj ⟩X = αj ηnj . Thus, the magnitude of each component decays at the geometric rate |ηj |n. This completes the proof. 

Remark 4. In this formulation, B acts as a learned or prescribed preconditioning operator, where the composite op-erator BA : X → X characterizes the projection of the current state onto the residual correction space and the error transition operator E = Id X −BA governs the iteration-wise error contraction. When A originates from a differential operator, the spectrum σ(E) = {ηj } is typically aligned with spatial frequency modes, leading to a spectral interpre-tation of convergence dynamics where error components associated with |ηj | ≪ 1 are rapidly attenuated, while those with |ηj | ≈ 1 near the spectral radius exhibit high persistence. Consequently, classical stationary iterations usually function as high-frequency smoothers that effectively damp oscillatory error components but struggle to reduce the low-frequency coarse-scale residuals corresponding to the dominant eigenvalues of the iteration matrix. 

Appendix B. Comparison between SINO and Deep Unrolling 

We designed the iterator operator using algorithm unrolling, a technique that shares conceptual roots with classical deep unrolling methods [71] but offers distinct advantages. The core mechanics involve mapping iterations of a traditional mathematical algorithm (e.g., for optimization or sparse coding) onto successive network layers while converting fixed parameters into trainable weights. This approach achieves a finite-depth model that delivers superior performance, structural interpretability, and computational efficiency. While algorithm unrolling methods offer numerous advantages, they also present certain limitations. First, as the number of unrolled layers increases, models may encounter gradient vanishing or explosion during training, leading to optimization difficulties. Moreover, the repeated use of nearly identical modules in deep networks can result in the 28 condensation phenomenon [72], where deeper structures degenerate into near-identity mappings, failing to achieve meaningful performance improvements. Second, these methods essentially learn mappings for discrete data points; when distribution shifts occur between training and test data, the learned hyperparameters may become mismatched, causing significant performance degradation. Additionally, the scalability and flexibility of deep unrolling models pose challenges: achieving high accuracy often requires substantially increasing the unrolling depth, which leads to a sharp rise in computational and memory costs. Finally, the learned parameters often fail to satisfy the convergence conditions of the original algorithm. While this may enhance performance, it simultaneously undermines theoretical interpretability. The iterator proposed in this study is an algorithm-unrolled model implemented in a latent space, which organi-cally integrates the powerful representational capacity of representation learning with the inherent interpretability of algorithm unrolling. Multiscale residual learning conducted in this latent space demonstrates superior stability and effectiveness compared to direct operations in the original high-dimensional data space. Furthermore, by learning continuous mappings and adopting stable initialization strategies in this space, the model’s generalization capabil-ity is significantly enhanced. Finally, leveraging the approximation theory of neural operators, we provide rigorous mathematical proofs for the proposed method, ensuring its stability and theoretical soundness from both empirical and theoretical perspectives. 

Appendix C. Computational Complexity of SINO 

We analyze the computational complexity of the SINO to characterize its scalability. For a two-dimensional input discretized on an n × n grid, let B denote the batch size, C the latent channel width, L the number of spectral layers in the starter, K the number of retained Fourier modes per dimension, and I the number of unrolled iterations. The total complexity is the sum of three components: lifting/projection, the spectral starter, and the iterative refinement. 

Lifting and Projection. The lifting and projection operators are implemented as pointwise linear transformations across the spatial grid. Their combined complexity scales as O(Bn 2C2), where we assume the input and output channel dimensions are small constants relative to C. This cost is typically negligible compared to the starter and iterator. 

Fourier-type starter. The starter follows the architecture of the Fourier Neural Operator (FNO) [41]. Each spectral layer consists of a fast Fourier transform (FFT), a spectral convolution on K × K modes, and an inverse FFT. The complexity for L such layers is O  LBCn 2 log n + LBC 2K2. This component captures global dependencies through its O(n2 log n) scaling. 

CNN-based iterator. The iterator operator Iθ performs I residual updates. Each iteration involves two local convolutional operators, A(n) 

> θ

and B(n) 

> θ

, parameterized by k×k kernels (typically k = 3 ). The floating-point operations (FLOPs) for one convolutional layer are approximately 2Bn 2C2k2. Thus, for I iterations, the refinement complexity is O(IBn 2C2k2). Given that k is a small fixed constant, the dominant term simplifies to O(IBn 2C2).

Total Complexity. Combining the above, the total inference complexity of SINO is given by: FLOPs = O  LBCn 2 log n + LBC 2K2 + IBn 2C2 .

This formulation explains the empirical trade-off observed in Fig. 3b: increasing the number of iterations I improves accuracy with a strictly linear increase in computational cost, while the number of trainable parameters remains nearly constant if weights are shared across iterations. In practice, a moderate I provides significant error reduction over the starter’s initialization while maintaining the efficiency inherent in local convolutional operations. 

Appendix D. Time Evolution Dataset Incompressible Navier Stokes equation. To generate training data for learning the operator of the 2-D Navier–Stokes equations in vorticity form, we solve the equation on the unit torus with periodic boundary conditions. The initial vor-ticity w0(x) is sampled from a Gaussian random field 

w0 ∼ N 



0, 73/2(−∆ + 49 I)−2.5

.

The forcing term is fixed as 

f (x) = 0 .1sin  2π(x1 + x2) + cos  2π(x1 + x2) .

29 The equations are solved using the stream-function formulation with a pseudo-spectral method [22]: a Poisson equa-tion is solved in Fourier space to recover the velocity field from vorticity, the nonlinear term is evaluated in physical space, and dealiasing is applied. Time integration is performed using a Crank–Nicolson scheme for the viscous term and an explicit update for the nonlinear term, with a time step ∆t = 10 −4.For the case with viscosity ν = 10 −3, we generate 5,000 data samples, while for ν = 10 −4, we generate 10 ,000 

data samples. For each viscosity setting, the training dataset consists of 1,000 trajectories, whereas the validation and test datasets each contain 200 trajectories with independently sampled initial conditions w0(x). Solutions are recorded every ∆t time units to construct the datasets used for training and evaluation. To ensure comparability, the resolution is fixed at 64 × 64 for both training and testing, and for smaller viscosities the final time horizon T is reduced to avoid uncontrolled chaotic behavior. 

Acoustic wave equation. To generate the dataset, we solve the above equation using a finite difference scheme with second-order central differencing in time and eighth-order finite differences in space. In scenarios where the wave speed distribution c(x, y ) of the medium is fixed and the source location varies, we get the fixed velocity map as 

c(x, y ) = (1 + sin x sin y), (x, y ) ∈ [0 , π ]2.

The spatial grid consists of Nx = Ny = 64 equally spaced points. The initial condition u0(x) is chosen as a Gaussian source. Letting T ∈ [0 , 1] and ∆t = 1 e − 3, we set 

u(x, y, 0) = exp 



− ∥x − xc∥22 + ∥y − yc∥22

σ2



,

where the center (xc, y c) is sampled randomly from a uniform distribution over the grid points. We consider the temporal domain t ∈ [0 , 1] and adopt a time step size of ∆t = 10 −3, resulting in 1000 discrete time steps. To construct the training and testing datasets, we uniformly subsample the solution every 20 time steps, thereby obtaining temporal sequences length 50 . We use 1000 samples for model training and evaluation. In scenarios where the wave speed distribution c(x, y ) varies while the source location remains fixed, we consider heterogeneous acoustic wave propagation in realistic breast tissue slices from the open dataset [55], following the experimental setup in [73]. Each breast slice provides a spatially varying speed map of shape (480 , 480) with a background sound speed of 1500m /s. The computational domain is defined over a 24cm × 24cm square region and discretized with a spatial step size ∆x = ∆ y = 0 .1cm , resulting in a 240 × 240 spatial grid. The wave equation is solved using a finite-difference time-domain scheme with second-order time stepping and eighth-order spatial differencing. We place four point sources uniformly along a circular ring of radius 9cm within the domain. The temporal domain is t ∈ [0 , 0.3]ms , with a time step size ∆t = 0 .3μs, leading to 1000 time steps in total. The source function is a Ricker wavelet with a central frequency of 0.5MHz , which corresponds to two samples per wavelength at the chosen temporal resolution. The forward simulation returns pressure fields sampled every 20 time steps, yielding temporal sequences of length 

50 . For each breast slice, the recorded data has a final shape of (50 , 240 , 240) . We use four sources per simulation and adopt a record gap of 20 for data collection. All simulations are conducted under a CFL number C ≤ 1 to ensure numerical stability. 

Shallow-water equation. To generate Ntrain samples for training, we consider a 2D radial dam-break problem on a square domain Ω = [ −2.5, 2.5] 2. The initial water height is set as 

h(0 , x, y ) = 

(2.0, r < px2 + y2,

1.0, r ≥ px2 + y2,

where the radius r is randomly sampled from a uniform distribution r ∼ U (0 .3, 0.7) . The system is simulated using the finite volume solver provided by PyClaw [74], with second-order accurate reconstruction in space and a TVD Runge– Kutta scheme for time integration. The spatial grid is discretized into 256 × 256 cells, and the solution is computed up to T = 1 .0 with a time step ∆t = 10 −3, resulting in 1000 temporal snapshots. For constructing the dataset, we uniformly subsample every 20 snapshots to obtain temporal sequences of length 50 . For each setting, we generate 

Ntrain = 1000 training trajectories, and Nvali = Ntest = 200 trajectories for validation and testing, respectively, all with independently sampled initial radius. We summarize the considered time-evolution PDE benchmarks together with their corresponding operator map-pings and representative input-output examples in Figure. D.12. 30 Appendix E. Additional results 

We provide supplementary experimental results to further validate the robustness and generalization utility of the proposed SINO framework across various physical regimes. Specifically, wave propagation predictions on a high-wavenumber dataset are presented in Fig. E.13, while the model’s zero-shot super-resolution performance on the 1D Burgers’ equation is summarized in Table E.5. To further investigate long-term stability, we analyze error accumulation over 100 recursive autoregressive inference steps as illustrated in Fig. E.14, which demonstrates SINO’s superior error resilience in extended temporal forecasting.    

> Table E.5: Benchmarks on 1-d Burgers’ equation for zero-shot super resolution. We train the SINO model with different iterative numbers Ion 1D Burgers data with size = 256 and evaluated at various higher resolution, without seeing any higher resolution data. The best results are highlighted in red, and the second-best results are shown in boldface.

Model R=256 R=512 R=1024 R=2048 R=4096 R=8192 

FNO 3.6038e-03 4.1226e-03 4.6048e-03 4.9082e-03 5.0679e-03 5.1495e-03 SINO I = 1 2.6836e-03 3.0529e-03 3.4430e-03 3.6811e-03 3.8064e-03 3.8704e-03 SINO I = 2 1.8061e-03 1.9723e-03 2.1593e-03 2.2689e-03 2.3270e-03 2.3568e-03 SINO I = 4 5.6948e-04 6.3532e-04 7.0056e-04 7.3600e-04 7.5465e-04 7.6419e-04 SINO I = 8 4.8622e-04 5.1652e-04 5.5206e-04 5.7300e-04 5.8421e-04 5.8999e-04 SINO I = 16 4.7280e-04 4.9733e-04 5.2427e-04 5.4068e-04 5.4952e-04 5.5409e-04 

SINO I = 32 3.5319e-04 3.6847e-04 3.8411e-04 3.9352e-04 3.9861e-04 4.0124e-04 References 

[1] J. Li, Y. Xue, Y. Li, H. Jia, Z. Zhou, L. Yang, S. Ren, J. Chen, Y. He, K. Xue, et al., Fully analog iteration for solving matrix equations with in-memory computing, Science Advances 11 (7) (2025) eadr6391. [2] Y. Tang, R. Chen, M. Lou, J. Fan, C. Yu, A. Nonaka, Z. Yao, W. Gao, Optical neural engine for solving scientific partial differential equations, Nature Communications 16 (1) (2025) 4603. [3] K. Ding, J. Yu, J. Huang, Y. Yang, Q. Zhang, H. Chen, Scitoolagent: a knowledge-graph-driven scientific agent for multitool integration, Nature Computational Science (2025) 1–11. [4] W. He, J. Li, X. Kong, L. Deng, Multi-level physics informed deep learning for solving partial differential equations in computational structural mechanics, Communications Engineering 3 (1) (2024) 151. [5] K. L. Tsakmakidis, T. P. Stefa´ nski, Discovery of the exact 3d one-way wave equation, Nature Communications 16 (1) (2025) 5719. [6] A. Allen, S. Markou, W. Tebbutt, J. Requeima, W. P. Bruinsma, T. R. Andersson, M. Herzog, N. D. Lane, M. Chantry, J. S. Hosking, et al., End-to-end data-driven weather prediction, Nature 641 (8065) (2025) 1172– 1179. [7] P. Bauer, P. Dueben, M. Chantry, F. Doblas-Reyes, T. Hoefler, A. McGovern, B. Stevens, Deep learning and a changing economy in weather and climate prediction, Nature Reviews Earth & Environment 4 (8) (2023) 507– 509. [8] G. Aarts, K. Fukushima, T. Hatsuda, A. Ipp, S. Shi, L. Wang, K. Zhou, Physics-driven learning for inverse problems in quantum chromodynamics, Nature Reviews Physics 7 (3) (2025) 154–163. [9] A. Tarantola, Inverse problem theory and methods for model parameter estimation, SIAM (2005). [10] C. Lyu, B. Romanowicz, L. Zhao, Y. Masson, Efficient hybrid numerical modeling of the seismic wavefield in the presence of solid-fluid boundaries, Nature Communications 16 (1) (2025) 1722. 31 [11] H. Zhao, Z. Liu, J. Tang, B. Gao, Q. Qin, J. Li, Y. Zhou, P. Yao, Y. Xi, Y. Lin, et al., Energy-efficient high-fidelity image reconstruction with memristor arrays for medical diagnosis, Nature Communications 14 (1) (2023) 2276. [12] G. Carleo, I. Cirac, K. Cranmer, L. Daudet, M. Schuld, N. Tishby, L. Vogt-Maranto, L. Zdeborová, Machine learning and the physical sciences, Reviews of Modern Physics 91 (4) (2019) 045002. [13] S. L. Brunton, J. N. Kutz, Promising directions of machine learning for partial differential equations, Nature Computational Science 4 (7) (2024) 483–494. [14] K. Kontolati, S. Goswami, G. Em Karniadakis, M. D. Shields, Learning nonlinear operators in latent spaces for real-time predictions of complex dynamics in physical systems, Nature Communications 15 (1) (2024) 5101. [15] E. Zappala, A. H. d. O. Fonseca, J. O. Caro, A. H. Moberly, M. J. Higley, J. Cardin, D. v. Dijk, Learning integral operators via neural integral equations, Nature Machine Intelligence 6 (9) (2024) 1046–1062. [16] K. Georgiou, C. Siettos, A. N. Yannacopoulos, Fredholm neural networks, SIAM Journal on Scientific Comput-ing 47 (4) (2025) C1006–C1031. [17] K. Azizzadenesheli, N. Kovachki, Z. Li, M. Liu-Schiaffini, J. Kossaifi, A. Anandkumar, Neural operators for accelerating scientific simulations and design, Nature Reviews Physics 6 (5) (2024) 320–328. [18] B. Wu, C. Liu, B. Eckart, J. Kautz, Neural interferometry: Image reconstruction from astronomical interferom-eters using transformer-conditioned neural fields, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-gence, Vol. 36, 2022, pp. 2685–2693. [19] J. N. Reddy, An introduction to the finite element method, New York 27 (14) (1993). [20] G. D. Smith, Numerical solution of partial differential equations: finite difference methods, Oxford University Press (1985). [21] R. Eymard, T. Gallouët, R. Herbin, Finite volume methods, Handbook of numerical analysis 7 (2000) 713–1018. [22] J. Shen, T. Tang, L.-L. Wang, Spectral methods: algorithms, analysis and applications, Springer Science & Business Media (2011). [23] E. Zhang, A. Kahana, A. Kopaniˇ cáková, E. Turkel, R. Ranade, J. Pathak, G. E. Karniadakis, Blending neural operators and relaxation methods in pde numerical solvers, Nature Machine Intelligence 6 (11) (2024) 1303– 1313. [24] A. Jiao, H. He, R. Ranade, J. Pathak, L. Lu, One-shot learning for solution operators of partial differential equations, Nature Communications 16 (1) (2025) 8386. [25] J. M. Ortega, M. L. Rockoff, Nonlinear difference equations and gauss-seidel type iterative methods, SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 3 (3) (1966) 497–513. [26] Y. Saad, Krylov subspace methods for solving large unsymmetric linear systems, Mathematics of computation 37 (155) (1981) 105–126. [27] M. R. Hestenes, E. Stiefel, et al., Methods of conjugate gradients for solving linear systems, Journal of research of the National Bureau of Standards 49 (6) (1952) 409–436. [28] Y. Saad, M. H. Schultz, Gmres: A generalized minimal residual algorithm for solving nonsymmetric linear systems, SIAM Journal on scientific and statistical computing 7 (3) (1986) 856–869. [29] A. H. Sherman, On newton-iterative methods for the solution of systems of nonlinear equations, SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 15 (4) (1978) 755–771. [30] R. Molinaro, Y. Yang, B. Engquist, S. Mishra, Neural inverse operators for solving pde inverse problems, in: Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning, ICML’23, JMLR.org, 2023. [31] Z. Li, H. Zheng, N. Kovachki, D. Jin, H. Chen, B. Liu, K. Azizzadenesheli, A. Anandkumar, Physics-informed neural operator for learning partial differential equations, ACM/IMS Journal of Data Science 1 (3) (2024) 1–27. 32 [32] X. Liu, H. Tang, Difffno: Diffusion fourier neural operator, in: Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 150–160. [33] N. Kovachki, Z. Li, B. Liu, K. Azizzadenesheli, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart, A. Anandkumar, Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces with applications to pdes, Journal of Machine Learning Research 24 (89) (2023) 1–97. [34] J. S. Hesthaven, S. Ubbiali, Non-intrusive reduced order modeling of nonlinear problems using neural networks, Journal of Computational Physics 363 (2018) 55–78. [35] K. Bhattacharya, B. Hosseini, N. B. Kovachki, A. M. Stuart, Model reduction and neural networks for parametric pdes, The SMAI journal of computational mathematics 7 (2021) 121–157. [36] T. O’Leary-Roseberry, U. Villa, P. Chen, O. Ghattas, Derivative-informed projected neural networks for high-dimensional parametric maps governed by pdes, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 388 (2022) 114199. [37] L. Lu, P. Jin, G. Pang, Z. Zhang, G. E. Karniadakis, Learning nonlinear operators via deeponet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators, Nature machine intelligence 3 (3) (2021) 218–229. [38] J. He, S. Koric, D. Abueidda, A. Najafi, I. Jasiuk, Geom-deeponet: A point-cloud-based deep operator network for field predictions on 3d parameterized geometries, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 429 (2024) 117130. [39] W. Xu, Y. Lu, L. Wang, Transfer learning enhanced deeponet for long-time prediction of evolution equations, in: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 37, 2023, pp. 10629–10636. [40] L. Lu, X. Meng, S. Cai, Z. Mao, S. Goswami, Z. Zhang, G. E. Karniadakis, A comprehensive and fair comparison of two neural operators (with practical extensions) based on fair data, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 393 (2022) 114778. [41] Z. Li, N. B. Kovachki, K. Azizzadenesheli, B. liu, K. Bhattacharya, A. Stuart, A. Anandkumar, Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations, in: International Conference on Learning Representations, 2021. [42] V. S. Fanaskov, I. V. Oseledets, Spectral neural operators, in: Doklady Mathematics, Vol. 108, Springer, 2023, pp. S226–S232. [43] T. Tripura, S. Chakraborty, Wavelet neural operator for solving parametric partial differential equations in com-putational mechanics problems, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 404 (2023) 115783. [44] Q. Cao, S. Goswami, G. E. Karniadakis, Laplace neural operator for solving differential equations, Nature Ma-chine Intelligence 6 (6) (2024) 631–640. [45] K. Li, W. Ye, D-fno: A decomposed fourier neural operator for large-scale parametric partial differential equa-tions, Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 436 (2025) 117732. [46] F. Lehmann, F. Gatti, M. Bertin, D. Clouteau, 3d elastic wave propagation with a factorized fourier neural operator (f-fno), Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 420 (2024) 116718. [47] M. A. Rahman, Z. E. Ross, K. Azizzadenesheli, U-NO: U-shaped neural operators, Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2023). [48] J. He, X. Liu, J. Xu, Mgno: Efficient parameterization of linear operators via multigrid, in: The Twelfth Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. [49] B. M. DeBlois, Linearizing convection terms in the navier-stokes equations, Computer methods in applied me-chanics and engineering 143 (3-4) (1997) 289–297. [50] J. M. Borwein, G. Li, M. K. Tam, Convergence rate analysis for averaged fixed point iterations in common fixed point problems, SIAM Journal on Optimization 27 (1) (2017) 1–33. 33 [51] J. Ho, A. Jain, P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion probabilistic models, Advances in neural information processing systems 33 (2020) 6840–6851. [52] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, Ł. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, Attention is all you need, Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017). [53] E. Stevens, L. Antiga, T. Viehmann, Deep Learning with PyTorch: Build, train, and tune neural networks using Python tools, Manning, 2020. [54] J. Xu, Iterative methods by space decomposition and subspace correction, SIAM review 34 (4) (1992) 581–613. [55] Z. Zeng, Y. Zheng, H. Hu, Z. Dong, Y. Zheng, X. Liu, J. Wang, Z. Shi, L. Zhang, Y. Li, et al., Openbreastus: Benchmarking neural operators for wave imaging using breast ultrasound computed tomography, arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.15035 (2025). [56] M. Takamoto, T. Praditia, R. Leiteritz, D. MacKinlay, F. Alesiani, D. Pflüger, M. Niepert, Pdebench: An exten-sive benchmark for scientific machine learning, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022) 1596–1611. [57] M. J. Rust, M. Bates, X. Zhuang, Sub-diffraction-limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy (storm), Nature methods 3 (10) (2006) 793–796. [58] E. Betzig, G. H. Patterson, R. Sougrat, O. W. Lindwasser, S. Olenych, J. S. Bonifacino, M. W. Davidson, J. Lippincott-Schwartz, H. F. Hess, Imaging intracellular fluorescent proteins at nanometer resolution, science 313 (5793) (2006) 1642–1645. [59] D. Li, L. Shao, B.-C. Chen, X. Zhang, M. Zhang, B. Moses, D. E. Milkie, J. R. Beach, J. A. Hammer III, M. Pasham, et al., Extended-resolution structured illumination imaging of endocytic and cytoskeletal dynamics, Science 349 (6251) (2015) aab3500. [60] C. Qiao, D. Li, Y. Guo, C. Liu, T. Jiang, Q. Dai, D. Li, Evaluation and development of deep neural networks for image super-resolution in optical microscopy, Nature methods 18 (2) (2021) 194–202. [61] Y. Zhang, K. Li, K. Li, L. Wang, B. Zhong, Y. Fu, Image super-resolution using very deep residual channel attention networks, in: Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 286– 301. [62] L. Chen, X. Zhong, F. Zhang, Y. Cheng, Y. Xu, Y. Qi, H. Li, Fuxi: a cascade machine learning forecasting system for 15-day global weather forecast, npj climate and atmospheric science 6 (1) (2023) 190. [63] K. Bi, L. Xie, H. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Gu, Q. Tian, Accurate medium-range global weather forecasting with 3d neural networks, Nature 619 (7970) (2023) 533–538. [64] T. Kurth, S. Subramanian, P. Harrington, J. Pathak, M. Mardani, D. Hall, A. Miele, K. Kashinath, A. Anandku-mar, Fourcastnet: Accelerating global high-resolution weather forecasting using adaptive fourier neural opera-tors, in: Proceedings of the platform for advanced scientific computing conference, 2023, pp. 1–11. [65] K. Lin, X. Li, Y. Ye, S. Feng, B. Zhang, G. Xu, Z. Wang, Spherical neural operator network for global weather prediction, IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology 34 (6) (2023) 4899–4913. [66] S. Rasp, P. D. Dueben, S. Scher, J. A. Weyn, S. Mouatadid, N. Thuerey, Weatherbench: a benchmark data set for data-driven weather forecasting, Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 12 (11) (2020) e2020MS002203. [67] D. Gilton, G. Ongie, R. Willett, Deep equilibrium architectures for inverse problems in imaging, IEEE Transac-tions on Computational Imaging 7 (2021) 1123–1133. [68] Y. Yang, Q. Gao, Y. Duan, Low-resolution prior equilibrium network for ct reconstruction, Inverse Problems 40 (8) (2024) 085010. 34 [69] T. Chen, H. Chen, Universal approximation to nonlinear operators by neural networks with arbitrary activation functions and its application to dynamical systems, IEEE transactions on neural networks 6 (4) (1995) 911–917. [70] N. Kovachki, S. Lanthaler, S. Mishra, On universal approximation and error bounds for fourier neural operators, Journal of Machine Learning Research 22 (290) (2021) 1–76. [71] V. Monga, Y. Li, Y. C. Eldar, Algorithm unrolling: Interpretable, efficient deep learning for signal and image processing, IEEE Signal Processing Magazine 38 (2) (2021) 18–44. [72] Z.-Q. J. Xu, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, An overview of condensation phenomenon in deep learning, arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.09484 (2025). [73] Z. Zeng, Y. Zheng, Y. Zheng, Y. Li, Z. Shi, H. Sun, Neural born series operator for biomedical ultrasound computed tomography, arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.15575 (2023). [74] D. I. Ketcheson, K. Mandli, A. J. Ahmadia, A. Alghamdi, M. Q. De Luna, M. Parsani, M. G. Knepley, M. Em-mett, Pyclaw: Accessible, extensible, scalable tools for wave propagation problems, SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 34 (4) (2012) C210–C231. 35 Figure D.12: Summary of the time-evolution PDE benchmarks considered in this work, including the governing equations, operator mappings, and representative input-output field visualizations. 

36 Figure E.13: Wave propagation prediction on a high-wavenumber dataset. The leftmost panel (blue dashed box) illustrates the input configu-ration, including the velocity map and the source location. The panels to the right and below display the wavefield evolution over 50 time steps. Odd rows show the ground truth wavefields obtained from numerical simulations, while even rows present the corresponding predictions generated by the model. The comparison highlights the model’s ability to capture fine-scale oscillations and complex scattering patterns in high-frequency regimes. 

37 Figure E.14: Long-horizon error accumulation on the advection–diffusion benchmark. The models are evaluated for 100 autoregressive inference steps, and the relative L2 error is reported at different time steps. Although the prediction error increases over time for all methods due to accumulated autoregressive error, SINO consistently achieves the lowest error throughout the entire horizon. Compared with FNO and MgNO, SINO exhibits slower error growth and better long-time stability. 

38