Title: When Good Equations Get Bad Scores: Improving Symbolic Regression Through Better Parameter Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.23272v1

Published Time: Mon, 25 May 2026 00:35:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# When Good Equations Get Bad Scores: Improving Symbolic Regression Through Better Parameter Optimization 

# Boxiao Wang 1, Kai Li 1* , Zhiwei Chen 1, Yang Huang 1,Runxiang Wang 1, Ziwen Zhang 1, Yifan Zhang 1, Jian Cheng 1

> 1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences 

Abstract 

Symbolic Regression (SR) plays a central role in scientific knowledge discovery by distilling mathematical equations from observational data. Most existing SR methods func-tion within a bi-level optimization framework: an outer loop that searches for the discrete equation structure, and an inner loop that optimizes the continuous parameters of that struc-ture. Crucially, parameter-fitting quality directly determines a structure’s score and thus the outer-loop search. However, nonlinear operators make the inner loop highly non-convex, and budget-driven reliance on fast local solvers (e.g., BFGS) often yields poor local minima and underestimated scores for correct structures. This “Good Structure, Bad Score” phe-nomenon becomes a key bottleneck, degrading efficiency and misguiding the search away from the true equation. To resolve this, we propose SAGE-Fit (Structure-Aware and Semantics-Guided Evaluator for Symbolic Regression), an SR-native fitting framework that exploits the dual native pri-ors of symbolic expressions. By capitalizing on the structural and semantic priors unique to SR, we design tailored mod-ules for each property, thereby effectively mitigating this opti-mization bottleneck. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach, as a plug-and-play module, significantly en-hances evaluation fidelity and universally improves the per-formance of various SR systems. 

# 1 Introduction 

Symbolic Regression (SR) differs from traditional regres-sion by simultaneously searching for optimal equation struc-tures and the associated parameters, with the goal of dis-covering interpretable physical laws from data (Schmidt and Lipson 2009; Billard and Diday 2002). While method-ologies have evolved from genetic programming (Koza 1994; Schmidt and Lipson 2009; Virgolin, Alderliesten, and Bosman 2019) to reinforcement learning (Petersen et al. 2021; Landajuela et al. 2022; Hayes et al. 2025; Li et al. 2024) and large language models (Shojaee et al. 2025; Mer-ler et al. 2024; Hua et al. 2025; Grayeli et al. 2024), the un-derlying paradigm remains a bi-level optimization frame-work . This framework consists of an outer loop that pro-poses discrete equation skeletons (e.g., expression trees or token sequences) and an inner loop that optimizes the con-tinuous constants (parameters) within these structures. Ide-ally, this decomposition allows the outer loop to focus on 

> *

Corresponding author. 

structural exploration while the inner loop handles numeri-cal fitting. However, we identify a critical asymmetry in cur-rent SR research: while the outer loop has benefited from so-phisticated architectural innovations, the inner loop largely relies on generic local optimizers such as BFGS or Nelder-Mead (Udrescu and Tegmark 2020; dos Reis, Caminha, and Penna 2024). This reliance assumes that these fast solvers can reliably assess the quality of a structure. In reality, nested nonlinear operators (e.g., exponentials and trigono-metric functions) create a highly non-convex loss landscape with numerous local minima—a “needle-in-a-basin” topol-ogy that generic optimizers struggle to navigate. Conse-quently, structurally correct equations often receive poor fit-ness scores because the local optimizer fails to locate the global parameters, a phenomenon we term “Good Struc-ture, Bad Score.” The repercussions of this inner-loop fail-ure are twofold. First, it degrades evaluation fidelity : the search algorithm is misled to discard promising candidates, which prevents convergence to the true physical law. Sec-ond, it wastes computational resources on repeated, ineffec-tive optimization attempts. As demonstrated in our experi-ments, even when the outer loop successfully identifies the exact ground-truth skeleton, standard optimizers frequently fail to fit the parameters, rendering the discovery process fu-tile. Thus, the bottleneck of modern SR has shifted from the generation of valid structures to the accurate evaluation of these structures. To understand when and why this happens, we conduct a landscape-level case analysis that character-izes optimization failures in SR from two complementary viewpoints: correct-structure landscapes and landscapes of partially correct structures. Instead of relying on black-box continuous solvers that ignore equation structures, we argue that a highly faithful evaluator must inherently respect the distinct nature of symbolic expressions. To this end, we pro-pose SAGE-Fit (Structure-Aware and Semantics-Guided 

Evaluator for Symbolic Regression), a unified parameter fit-ting framework that explicitly exploits the dual native pri-ors of symbolic equations. Specifically, to target the struc-tural prior, we leverage the hierarchical parameter distribu-tion within the expression tree to design a Tree-Directed Variable Projection that deterministically decouples condi-tionally linear parameters; concurrently, by utilizing the ex-plicitly known analytic equation structure upon the reduced non-linear manifold, we formulate an SR-specialized Pro-

> arXiv:2605.23272v1 [cs.LG] 22 May 2026

jected Gauss–Newton method to achieve highly efficient lo-cal convergence. To target the semantic prior, we address the critical risk of basin collapse inherent to random parameter-space initialization by introducing Semantics-Guided Ini-tialization . By evaluating the actual input-output behavioral mappings of candidates rather than relying on deceptive dis-tances in the parameter space, we design a Function-Space Farthest-Point Sampling (FS-FPS) mechanism to guarantee that the starting points are maximally diverse in their true se-mantic behavior. Finally, we integrate these unified modules as a plug-and-play evaluator into representative SR frame-works spanning genetic programming, reinforcement learn-ing, and LLM-based candidate generation. Across these di-verse settings, upgrading the inner-loop optimizer consis-tently improves both symbolic accuracy and numerical fi-delity, thereby demonstrating that enhancing inner-loop op-timization alone can substantially strengthen mainstream SR systems. 

# 2 Related Work 

With the increasing adoption of two-part SR paradigms, the structure discovery module determines the operators and compositional form of the expression, while parameter fit-ting module refines the numerical constants via continuous optimization algorithms under the fixed structure. This de-composed strategy substantially reduces the complexity of the overall search space, decouples structure discovery from parameter estimation and improves the reliability and stabil-ity of candidate structure evaluation. Since this work focuses on the bi-level formulation, we review prior studies from two complementary perspectives: (i) outer-loop structure search, and (ii) inner-loop parameter optimization. 

## 2.1 Structure Search 

Early SR methods primarily relied on deterministic model-ing and sparse regression, such as FFX (McConaghy 2011; Vaddireddy and San 2019; Kammerer, Kronberger, and Kommenda 2022) and SINDy (Brunton, Proctor, and Kutz 2016a,b; Udrescu and Tegmark 2020). These methods ex-hibit high efficiency and stability when the hypothesis space is constrained to a predefined library of basis functions; however, their expressive power is largely limited by the de-sign of the function library. To expand the searchable func-tion space, genetic programming (GP)-based SR methods have been extensively studied (Koza 1994; Schmidt and Lip-son 2009; Virgolin, Alderliesten, and Bosman 2019). These methods typically represent expressions as trees and perform global search over the symbolic composition space via evo-lutionary operators such as mutation and crossover. Build-ing upon this paradigm, methods such as PySR (Cranmer 2023) further adopt multi-objective formulations for candi-date selection, leading to improved search efficiency and ex-pression quality. With the advancement of neural network methodologies, SR has increasingly been combined with neuro-symbolic and search-driven approaches. For instance, Equation Learner (EQL) replaces standard neural network activation functions with interpretable mathematical opera-tors (Martius and Lampert 2016; Sahoo, Lampert, and Mar-tius 2018; Dong et al. 2024), enabling the learning of sym-bolically meaningful functional connections. Other meth-ods, including DSR (Petersen et al. 2021), DSO (Landajuela et al. 2022; Hayes et al. 2025), and DSN (Li et al. 2024), for-mulate SR as a sequential decision-making problem and em-ploy reinforcement learning to explore the expression space. In addition, several studies integrate Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) with deep generative models to enhance global exploration and the stability of symbolic expression search (Kamienny et al. 2023; Huang et al. 2025). More re-cently, SR has witnessed growing interest in large language model (LLM)-driven approaches (Shojaee et al. 2025; Mer-ler et al. 2024; Hua et al. 2025; Grayeli et al. 2024). Bene-fiting from strong capabilities in code generation and sym-bolic reasoning, these models are used to propose symbolic expressions or programmatic equation templates. Further-more, retrieval-augmented methods such as RAG-SR incor-porate external or historical expressions through retrieval-augmented generation mechanisms, thereby improving the stability and quality of generated symbolic models (Zhang et al. 2025; Guo et al. 2025). 

## 2.2 Parameter Optimization 

Early GP-based SR often performed constant fitting us-ing local or stochastic search methods such as hill climbing (Koza 1994) and simulated annealing (Stinstra, Rennen, and Teeuwen 2008; Kantor, Von Zuben, and de Franca 2021). To improve robustness under highly non-convex objectives, subsequent work introduced population-based, gradient-free optimizers, including genetic algo-rithms (Alonso, Montana, and Borges 2009), particle swarm optimization (Loebl and Rozinajov´ a 2018; Sheta et al. 2023), and differential evolution (Cerny, Nelson, and Zhou 2008). These derivative-free approaches are generally less sensitive to poor local geometry, but can be sample-inefficient and may converge slowly or yield suboptimal numerical accuracy. With the increasing prevalence of bi-level SR pipelines, the inner-loop fitting problem is typically solved by continuous optimizers specialized for regression-style objectives. Many systems rely on fast local optimiz-ers such as quasi-Newton methods (e.g., BFGS) or simplex-based methods (e.g., Nelder–Mead) for rapid error reduc-tion (Cranmer 2023; Petersen et al. 2021). When the ob-jective can be cast as (or approximated by) nonlinear least squares, least-squares solvers such as Levenberg–Marquardt are also commonly used for refinement (Burlacu, Kron-berger, and Kommenda 2020). In neural-network-based SR, parameter adjustment is typically carried out during train-ing via gradient-based optimization, while additional local refinement may be applied to obtain precise constants for the final symbolic form (Martius and Lampert 2016; Sa-hoo, Lampert, and Martius 2018; Li et al. 2024). These choices are reflected across representative SR systems: PySR fits constants for candidate trees using local optimiz-ers such as BFGS or Nelder–Mead (Cranmer 2023); Operon performs post-hoc refinement using Levenberg–Marquardt least-squares optimization (Burlacu, Kronberger, and Kom-menda 2020); DSR refits constants using gradient-based op-timizers (e.g., BFGS) and uses the optimized error as the learning signal for structure search (Petersen et al. 2021); and LLM-SR iteratively updates parameters via automatic differentiation coupled with optimizers such as Adam or BFGS (Shojaee et al. 2025). 

# 3 Preliminary 

## 3.1 Symbolic Regression Task 

In SR (Makke and Chawla 2024), the learning task typically starts with a dataset consisting of input–output pairs: 

D = {(xi, y i)}ni=1 , xi ∈ Rd, y i ∈ R, (1) where xi denotes a d-dimensional input vector and yi is the corresponding scalar output. The goal is to discover an ex-plicit analytic equation f (·) such that the predicted outputs 

ˆyi = f (xi) accurately approximate the ground-truth targets 

yi, while maintaining robust generalization to unseen inputs. 

## 3.2 Equation Structures and Parameter Fitting 

Equation structures. In many SR methods, a candidate equation is commonly viewed as being determined jointly by a discrete symbolic structure and continuous numerical parameters . The former specifies the operator symbols, vari-able symbols, and their combinatorial arrangement (e.g., an expression tree or a computational graph), while the latter comprises numerical quantities that must be estimated from data (e.g., constants, coefficients, frequencies, and phases). Motivated by this widely adopted framework, we define an 

equation structure as follows: all numerically unspecified components in an expression are abstracted as parameter placeholder , while the discrete symbolic structure is kept unchanged. For example, sin(2 x) and sin(3 .3x + π) can be regarded as instances of the same structure sin( ax + b),where a and b are parameters to be fitted. Formally, a struc-ture induces a parametric function family 

f (· ; θ) : X → R, θ ∈ Θf ⊂ Rdf , (2) where X ⊆ Rd denotes the input space, Θf is the parameter space associated with the structure f , and df is the parame-ter dimension (i.e., the number of parameter slots). 

Parameter fitting. Given a fixed structure f , parameter fitting aims to estimate optimal parameters from the dataset 

D = {(xi, y i)}ni=1 . We typically define the empirical loss in terms of the mean squared error (MSE): 

Lf (θ; D) = 1

n

> n

X

> i=1

 yi − f (xi; θ)2. (3) The parameter fitting problem for the structure can then be formulated as 

θ∗ 

> f

(D) ∈ arg min 

> θ∈Θf

Lf (θ; D). (4) It is worth noting that, unlike linear models of the form “basis functions + coefficients”, SR often involves param-eters that appear inside nonlinear operators (e.g., sin( θx ),

xθ , exp( θx )), which may render Lf (θ; D) a non-convex ob-jective. 

# 4 Anatomy of Fitting Failures 

In SR, fitting failures are predominantly tied to the noncon-vexity induced by nonlinear operators and nonlinear param-eterization. When parameters enter the model linearly, co-efficients can be recovered reliably via (regularized) least squares, and the fitting outcome is largely insensitive to initialization. In contrast, nonlinear parameterization makes the objective highly nonconvex and often ill-conditioned, so local solvers become initialization-sensitive and can return severely underestimated scores even for correct structures. 

## 4.1 Correct-structure landscapes: SR Scoring Needle-Basin on a Rugged Landscape 

In this subsection, we study the optimization landscape of structures that are structurally identical to the ground-truth equations. Unlike simple linear models, equations with nested nonlinear terms—commonly used in physics to de-scribe oscillatory dynamics or exponential decay—often in-duce a highly ill-conditioned geometry (Ioannou, Li` o, and Cicuta 2026; Schmidt and Lipson 2009). We refer to the characteristic geometry arising from the complex coupling of nonlinear parameters as a Needle-Basin (Gill and Murray 1978). 

The “Needle-in-a-Basin” Topology. From the perspec-tive of SR scoring, these needle-basins are embedded in a highly rugged loss surface populated with poor station-ary points and flat plateaus, as shown in Figure 1. Conse-quently, single-start local fitters (e.g., BFGS-style methods) are prone to converging to high-error stationary points or stalling on plateaus under conventional initializations (Kom-menda et al. 2020). This premature termination triggers stopping criteria early, assigning an unjustifiably poor score to an otherwise correct structure (i.e., an optimizer-induced false negative). 

Non-convexity and Multimodality. The landscape of nonlinear SR structures is inherently multimodal. As il-lustrated in Figure 1, the parameter space is partitioned into multiple disconnected basins of attraction (Sergeyev, Kvasov, and Mukhametzhanov 2016; Riley, Webb, and Baker 2025). This multimodality often stems from the peri-odicity of trigonometric operators or the symmetry of expo-nential terms, creating numerous suboptimal local attractors that compete with the global solution. Standard gradient-based methods lack the mechanism to escape these subop-timal basins once initialized within them. 

Stalling and Premature Termination. Local fitters com-monly used in SR typically rely on gradient-norm–based stopping rules (e.g., ∥∇ L∥ < ϵ ). In a rugged needle-basin landscape, once the optimizer traverses into a suboptimal attractor region or a flat plateau, the local gradient magni-tudes can diminish rapidly. This satisfies the stopping crite-rion even though the resulting fitting error remains orders of magnitude higher than the best attainable level for that struc-ture. This phenomenon distorts the fitness score fed back to the outer-loop search (dos Reis, Caminha, and Penna 2024; Kommenda et al. 2020), misguiding the evolutionary pro-cess. (a) Oscillator2 (b) PO25 (c) PO27 

Figure 1: “Needle-in-a-basin” phenomenon in SR. We select three representative cases from llmsrbench. For each task, we visualize the MSE loss landscape with a 2D slice (top) and a 3D view (bottom). 

## 4.2 Landscapes of Partially Correct Structures: Diverse and Unstable Fitting Behaviors 

In this subsection, we investigate the parameter optimiza-tion landscapes associated with partially correct structures. Here, a candidate structure is defined as “partially correct” if it deviates from the ground-truth equation solely through localized structural modifications (e.g., the omission of a term or the substitution of a local operator). In contrast to the correct structures discussed in Section 4.1—which typ-ically exhibit a consistent needle-basin geometry—we ob-serve diverse and unstable fitting behaviors for partially correct structures (see Fig. 2). Specifically, the loss land-scapes and resulting optimization trajectories vary markedly, characterized by three recurring phenomena (Kronberger and de Franca 2025). First, low-error regions often mani-fest as needle-basin pockets or trenches; in certain cross-sections, multiple isolated low-error pockets are observ-able. Second, we frequently observe multiple competitive basins , where several disconnected basins with comparable minimum errors coexist, implying that the solution yielding a low error is not unique. Finally, the landscape may fea-ture wide valleys with high barriers : although the optimal valley can be relatively broad, it is often separated from sub-optimal basins by significant energy barriers or narrow pas-sages. 

# 5 Method 

Section 4 demonstrates that the optimization landscape of the SR inner loop is characterized by two primary fail-ure modes: severe ill-conditioning (needle-in-a-basin land-scapes) for correct structures, and competing low-error basins for partially correct structures. These issues arise be-cause the structure of the symbolic expression is typically treated as a black box. A generic continuous optimizer ob-serves only the parameter vector θ ∈ Rd and the loss func-tion L(θ), thereby ignoring two strong priors inherent to the construction of an SR candidate. The first prior is algebraic :the expression tree determines which parameters enter the residual through affine transformations and which are gen-uinely non-linear. The second prior is semantic : the outer loop ultimately evaluates the function induced on the data, rather than the specific parameter coordinates that generate it. We utilize these two priors as the foundational design principles for the inner-loop optimizer, integrating them into a unified evaluator named SAGE-Fit (Structure-Aware and Semantics-Guided Evaluator for Symbolic Regression). 

## 5.1 Rethinking Parameter Optimization in SR 

Given a candidate structure T with a parameter vector θ ∈

Rd and n training points, the ideal inner-loop score is the optimal mean squared error 

S(T ) = min 

> θ∈ΘT

1

n y − fT (X; θ) 22. (5) However, the outer loop typically receives a budget-limited estimate bS(T ) = 1 

> n

y − fT (X; ˆθ) 22, where ˆθ represents the parameter configuration returned by the inner-loop opti-mizer under a fixed computational budget. Throughout this section, every residual norm ∥ · ∥ 22 utilized as a loss, score, or trigger quantity is normalized by n; thus, all loss values correspond to the mean squared error. The non-negative gap 

∆( T ) = bS(T ) − S (T ) ≥ 0 (6) is defined as the score distortion . When ∆( T ) is exception-ally large for a structurally promising candidate T , the outer (a) Oscillator2 (b) PO25 (c) PO27 

Figure 2: Non-convexity and multimodality in nonlinear SR: disconnected basins and local-optimum traps. loop incorrectly discards the structure. This phenomenon constitutes an optimizer-induced false negative, which is quantified empirically in Section 4. Consequently, reducing 

∆( T ) uniformly across all candidates , rather than merely improving the accuracy of any single fitting process, serves as the central design objective for an evaluator tailored to symbolic regression. A generic continuous optimizer min-imizes the objective in (6) relying strictly on standard de-scent methodologies. Instead, two fundamental properties of a symbolic candidate, which are universally available yet frequently ignored, can be systematically exploited. 

Algebraic structural prior. The expression T is repre-sented as an abstract syntax tree (AST). Traversing this tree reveals which parameters enter the residual affinely 

(i.e., conditionally linear parameters) and which are gen-uinely non-linear. This exact decomposition is directly de-rived from the algebraic structure of the tree and effectively reduces the dimensionality of the non-linear search space. 

Functional semantic prior. The critical component for evaluation is the function mapping x 7 → fT (x; θ) over the dataset, rather than the specific coordinates of the parameter vector θ. Distances in the parameter space θ are frequently misleading; for instance, a sin( bx + c) = ( −a) sin( bx +

c + π). Therefore, a faithful measure of diversity must be defined based on the observed functional behavior rather than on parameter coordinates. In the remainder of this sec-tion, we operationalize each prior into a concrete mechanism (Sections 5.2, 5.3, and 5.4) and integrate them to formulate the adaptive SAGE-Fit evaluator (Section 5.5). 

## 5.2 Module 1: Structure-Aware Dimensionality Reduction 

The Bottleneck. Traditional optimizers treat all param-eters uniformly, placing them within the same high-dimensional search space regardless of whether they enter the equation linearly or non-linearly. This uniform treatment forces the optimizer to navigate a mixed landscape where linear coefficients (e.g., amplitudes in a sin( bx + c)) are entangled with genuinely non-linear parameters (e.g., fre-quency b and phase c). The resulting coupling significantly inflates the effective dimensionality and introduces spurious ill-conditioning. 

Deterministic Dimension Collapse via Variable Projec-tion. We exploit the structural prior inherent in symbolic expressions: by parsing the abstract syntax tree (AST) of the equation, we automatically identify which parameters are conditionally linear. These are parameters for which the equation becomes affine when all other parameters are held fixed. Concretely, we traverse the AST of candidate T and certify that the parameter θk is conditionally linear if and only if 

∂f T

∂θ k

is independent of θk, and fT θk =0 contains no θk.

(7) This condition is verified symbolically via an affine-propagation pass over the AST. Parameters satisfying both conditions form the linear set α; the remaining parameters constitute the irreducible non-linear set β. The candidate then admits the separable formulation 

fT (X; α, β ) = c(X; β) + Φ( X; β) α, (8) where Φ( X; β) ∈ Rn×m is a basis matrix whose columns depend on the data and β, but remain invariant with re-spect to α. Crucially, this decomposition allows the linear basis to depend on the non-linear parameters. For instance, in a sin( bx +c), the amplitude a is absorbed into α and elimi-nated by a linear solver, while the frequency and phase (b, c )

remain in the projected non-linear variable β. For any fixed 

β, the optimal α is obtained in closed form via linear least squares: 

α⋆(β) =  Φ( X; β)⊤Φ( X; β)†Φ( X; β)⊤ y − c(X; β),

(9) where (·)† denotes a rank-revealing pseudo-inverse with Tikhonov regularization applied when Φ⊤Φ is rank-deficient. This step involves a brief, deterministic linear so-lution process, which is never delegated to a non-linear opti-mizer. The original d-dimensional problem collapses to the projected non-linear program 

min  

> β∈B

Lproj (β) = 1

n y − c(X; β) − Φ( X; β) α⋆(β) 22,

(10) whose argument resides on an irreducible non-linear mani-fold of dimension dβ < d .

Impact. By analytically eliminating the linear subspace, Variable Projection (VarPro) achieves a deterministic dimen-sion collapse : the high-dimensional mixed search space is explicitly reduced to a lower-dimensional, purely non-linear manifold. This reduction substantially decreases optimiza-tion difficulty and removes the spurious linear-to-non-linear coupling that drives much of the needle-in-a-basin pathol-ogy described in Section 4. 

## 5.3 Module 2: Semantics-Guided Initialization via Function-Space Farthest-Point Sampling 

The Bottleneck. To escape local minima, multi-start strategies are essential. However, traditional approaches sample starting points uniformly within the parameter space . This strategy is fundamentally problematic for SR: the distance in the parameter space is highly deceptive. For example, sin( x) and sin( x + 2 π) are semantically identical despite possessing vastly different parameter coordinates. Random sampling in the parameter space thus wastes com-putational budget on redundant starting points that collapse into the same basin, a phenomenon we term basin collapse .

The Solution of SAGE-Fit: Diversity in Function Space, Not Parameter Space. We introduce Function-Space Farthest-Point Sampling (FS-FPS), which ensures that start-ing points are maximally diverse in terms of their observed behavior on the training data, rather than their parameter co-ordinates. This mechanism represents the core innovation of this work. The algorithm proceeds in three steps: 1. Oversampling : Generate M = 100 candidate parame-ter vectors by sampling around the warm initialization within the projected β space (following the VarPro di-mension reduction). 2. Function-space evaluation : For each candi-date βm, compute the predicted output vector 

fm = fT (X; α⋆(βm), β m) on the training set. This procedure maps each parameter vector to its semantic fingerprint , which is the actual function it represents. 3. Farthest-point selection : Within the space of output vectors {fm}, greedily select K = 8 points that are maxi-mally separated under the normalized Euclidean distance 

df (fi, fj ) = ∥fi − fj ∥2

∥y∥2 + ϵ . (11) The first point is the candidate with the lowest training loss; subsequent points are chosen to maximize the min-imum distance to all previously selected points. This procedure guarantees that the K selected starting points exhibit maximal behavioral diversity : they produce gen-uinely different predictions on the training data. Conse-quently, they cover distinct regions of the function space and significantly reduce the risk of basin collapse. 

Why This Works. Diversity in the parameter space does not imply diversity in the function space due to symme-tries (e.g., sin( x + 2 πk )), redundancies (e.g., a sin( bx ) = (−a) sin( bx + π)), and the non-linear warping of parame-ter coordinates into function outputs. By directly measuring diversity in the function space, FS-FPS ensures that each of the K starting points explores a genuinely distinct attractor basin, thereby covering the global optimum with high prob-ability. 

Computational Cost. The M function evaluations re-quired for FS-FPS introduce a modest computational over-head. However, this cost is largely offset by faster conver-gence: because the selected starting points are of higher quality, the subsequent local optimization requires fewer it-erations to reach the basin floor. 

## 5.4 Module 3: SR-Specialized Local Attraction via Projected Gauss–Newton 

The Bottleneck. Even after dimension reduction and semantic initialization, the projected non-linear manifold 

Lproj (β) remains highly non-convex due to trigonometric periodicity, exponential plateaus, and nested non-linearities. Standard gradient descent methods are prohibitively slow on such optimization landscapes. 

The Solution of SAGE-Fit: Curvature-Aware Descent on the Projected Manifold. We employ a Projected Gauss– Newton step with Trust Region Reflective (TRF) damping, specifically tailored for the SR setting. Define the projected residual ˜r(β) = y−c(X; β)−Φ( X; β) α⋆(β) and the corre-sponding projected Jacobian ˜J(β) = ∂˜r/∂β ∈ Rn×dβ . Fol-lowing the Golub–Pereyra construction (Golub and Pereyra 2003), the parameter vector α⋆(β) is re-solved at every eval-uation of β via Eq. (9). Consequently, ˜r is a function of solely β, and ˜J implicitly accounts for the dependence of 

α⋆ on β. In this implementation, ˜J is obtained through a central finite-difference pass over β, with α⋆ recomputed by the same rank-guarded least squares solver at each finite-difference probe. The projected Levenberg–Marquardt step is formulated as follows: 

∆β = −

 ˜J⊤ ˜J + λβ

  diag( ˜J⊤ ˜J) + ηI −1 ˜J⊤ ˜r, (12) with a damping parameter λβ ≥ 0 and a small numerical floor η > 0 on the diagonal, which prevents zero values in cases where an entry in β exerts no leverage on ˜r. Two prop-erties make this step particularly well suited to SR optimiza-tion landscapes. First, the Hessian-like matrix is of dimen-sion dβ × dβ rather than d × d: the curvature observed by the solver represents the curvature of the irreducible mani-fold alone, free from the spurious coupling that conditionally linear coefficients would otherwise inject into a full Newton system. Second, the scale anisotropy across the entries of β

(e.g., sin( ωx ) versus xk) is normalized in a coordinate-wise manner by the term diag( ˜J⊤ ˜J).

Impact. Because the K starting points obtained from FS-FPS are semantically diverse and of high quality, the projected Gauss–Newton method converges rapidly to the global optimum, often requiring only a few iterations. The combination of high-quality initialization (Module 2) and rapid local convergence (Module 3) ensures that SAGE-Fit remains both reliable and computationally efficient. 

## 5.5 The SAGE-Fit Evaluator 

The three aforementioned modules are integrated into a uni-fied evaluator that takes a candidate equation T as input and returns a faithful score bS(T ), along with the fitted parame-ters (ˆ α, ˆβ). The complete procedure is summarized in Algo-rithm 1 in Appendix A. 

Discussion. SAGE-Fit renders the inner loop prior-aware 

along two orthogonal axes. The structural prior (Module 1) exploits the algebraic structure of the AST to determin-istically collapse the search space from d dimensions to 

dβ < d dimensions, thereby eliminating spurious linear-to-non-linear coupling. The semantic prior (Module 2) en-sures that the diversity of multiple starting points is mea-sured in the function space rather than the parameter space. This approach prevents basin collapse and guarantees that each starting point explores a genuinely distinct region of the optimization landscape. Subsequently, Module 3 provides rapid, curvature-aware local convergence originating from these high-quality seed points. Consequently, this three-module pipeline directly addresses the two failure regimes characterized in Section 4. Specifically, the needle-in-a-basin topographies driven by linear-to-non-linear coupling are eliminated by the VarPro projection (Module 1), whereas the residual multimodality on the projected manifold is miti-gated through semantic diversity during initialization (Mod-ule 2), followed by rapid local attraction (Module 3). In con-trast to traditional optimizers that treat all parameters and starting points uniformly, SAGE-Fit leverages the unique structure inherent in symbolic regression to achieve both high reliability and computational efficiency. 

# 6 Experiment 

## 6.1 Experimental Setup 

Benchmark Datasets. To rigorously evaluate the perfor-mance of SAGE-Fit under conditions that mimic real-world scientific discovery, we utilize the LSR-Synth dataset from the LLM-SRBench suite, which comprises 128 distinct equation discovery problems. This dataset provides two crit-ical conditions for our study. First, it mitigates the risk of data contamination and rote memorization often observed in LLMs by constructing equations through the composition of known scientific terms with synthetic, yet plausible, novel terms. Second, the dataset features a diverse collection of high-quality equations characterized by complex parameter structures. This complexity provides a challenging testbed that closely mirrors the “needle-in-a-basin” optimization landscape, allowing us to observe how different methods perform when parameter fitting is a primary bottleneck. More details about the dataset construction and statistics are provided in Appendix B. Baselines. We compare SAGE-Fit against four representative SR frameworks spanning evolu-tionary, deep learning, and LLM-based paradigms. We in-clude PySR, a leading evolutionary approach coupling high-performance evolutionary search with symbolic simplifica-tion to discover interpretable equations. We also evaluate uDSR, which upgrades the traditional RNN-based controller in DSR to a pre-trained Transformer and employs neural-guided decoding to generate expression trees. Furthermore, we include LaSR, a hybrid method that distills abstract sym-bolic concepts from prior equations to guide the interplay between LLM generation and evolutionary search. Finally, we test LLM-SR, a program-search framework that synthe-sizes equation skeletons as Python functions by integrat-ing LLM scientific knowledge with data-driven multi-island evolutionary search. To isolate the contribution of the inner-loop evaluator, we test each baseline in its original form and a modified version denoted with “+” (e.g., PySR+), where the original parameter optimization module is replaced by SAGE-Fit while keeping the outer-loop search procedure unchanged. Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate all methods using three standard metrics: prediction accuracy, numerical fit, and symbolic correctness. To measure prediction preci-sion, we report the Accuracy to Tolerance ( Acc τ ) based on the relative error. For a tolerance τ , this is defined as 

Acc τ = 1

Ntest 

> Ntest

X

> i=1

1

 ˆyi − yi

yi

≤ τ



.

We additionally report the Normalized Mean Squared Error (NMSE) to assess the overall numerical accuracy, calculated as 

NMSE = 

PNtest  

> i=1

(ˆ yi − yi)2

PNtest  

> i=1

(yi − ¯y)2 ,

where ¯y denotes the mean of the target values. Finally, to evaluate the structural quality of the discovered expressions, we adopt the Symbolic Accuracy (SA) metric. SA measures whether the discovered equation recovers the correct sym-bolic form, specifically checking whether the found equa-tion is mathematically equivalent to the ground-truth equa-tion up to fitted constants. Implementation Details. To en-sure a fair comparison across disparate symbolic regression frameworks, we align the computational budget by enforc-ing a strict time limit of 1800 seconds per equation for every method. For each baseline and its corresponding “Plus” vari-ant, we keep all outer-loop hyperparameters identical and run the paired experiments under the same random seed, the same hyperparameter configuration, and the same GPU Models LSR-Synth                                                                                                               

> Chemistry Biology Physics Material Science SA(%) ↑Acc 0.1(%) ↑NMSE ↓SA(%) ↑Acc 0.1(%) ↑NMSE ↓SA(%) ↑Acc 0.1(%) ↑NMSE ↓SA(%) ↑Acc 0.1(%) ↑NMSE ↓
> PySR 2.78 37.14 5.30e-4 13.04 19.05 3.67e-3 0.00 16.00 4.80e-3 4.00 11.76 1.90e-5 PySR+ 8.33 43.33 3.88e-4 29.17 45.83 3.51e-3 2.27 52.63 2.92e-3 16.00 41.67 1.11e-5
> uDSR 11.11 54.29 4.05e-7 0.00 20.83 7.76e-2 0.00 7.50 1.19e-2 0.00 13.04 1.20e-3 uDSR+ 13.89 64.89 1.22e-7 4.17 23.81 2.37e-2 2.27 12.50 4.82e-3 0.00 15.79 1.06e-3
> LaSR 2.78 25.00 1.50e-3 0.00 0.00 3.47e-1 2.27 6.82 5.95e-3 0.00 4.00 1.50e-3 LaSR+ 5.56 27.78 1.38e-3 16.67 8.33 1.02e-3 6.81 9.09 3.85e-3 4.00 8.00 6.02e-4
> LLM-SR 8.33 33.33 1.91e-5 16.67 41.67 4.54e-5 4.55 36.84 1.04e-4 4.00 11.36 2.31e-5 LLM-SR+ 11.11 60.61 1.50e-5 20.80 41.67 1.84e-5 11.36 48.00 9.23e-5 8.00 15.91 2.05e-5

Table 1: Overall performance on LLM-SRBench (Qwen2.5-7B). environment. This design isolates the intended algorithmic change to the inner-loop parameter optimization module. For the LLM-driven approaches, including LLM-SR and LaSR, we use Qwen2.5-7B as the backbone model for can-didate generation and reasoning. The baseline and “Plus” variants share the same model deployment, decoding param-eters, prompt templates, and search settings, ensuring that differences in search behavior arise from evaluator feedback rather than from changes in the LLM setup. 

## 6.2 Main Results 

Performance Comparison. The main results are summa-rized in Table 1. Before analyzing specific metrics, we em-phasize a critical implementation detail designed to ensure strict fairness. Upon the termination of the search process for all baseline methods (PySR, uDSR, LaSR, LLM-SR), we applied our proposed Strategy A to refine the parame-ters of the final proposed equations. We observed that this post-hoc refinement consistently reduced the Mean Squared Error (MSE) across all baselines, which confirms the su-perior convergence capabilities of our optimizer. Crucially, the metrics reported in the “Baseline” rows of Table 1 were computed after this refinement. This experimental design aims to decouple the gains derived from “better final pa-rameter tuning” from those resulting from “better structure searching.” By standardizing the final parameter fitting step, any performance gaps observed in the “+” variants are at-tributable solely to the capacity of the optimizer to guide the outer loop toward more promising basins of attraction dur-ing the search process. Under this rigorous evaluation pro-tocol, the results demonstrate that equipping existing frame-works with our optimizer yields substantial improvements across all metrics. Regarding Enhanced Structure Discov-ery (SA) , the “+” variants consistently achieve higher Sym-bolic Accuracy. For instance, PySR+ increases SA from 2.78% to 8.33% ( 3×), while uDSR+ attains the highest SA of 13.89% on the challenging LSR-Synth dataset. These re-sults indicate that improved parameter optimization within the inner loop effectively mitigates the “Good Structure, Bad Score” phenomenon, thereby enabling the retention and evolution of correct skeletons that might otherwise be discarded due to suboptimal fitting. Furthermore, in terms of Improved Numerical Fit (Acc & NMSE) , despite the baselines undergoing the same post-hoc refinement, the “+” methods significantly outperform them in both accuracy (Acc 0.1) and numerical error (NMSE). This suggests that our optimizer assists the frameworks in navigating toward fundamentally superior structural forms with better gener-alizability, rather than merely fitting incorrect structures. Notably, LLM-SR+ nearly doubles the accuracy (33.33% 

→ 60.61%) in the first group, demonstrating the synergy between LLM-generated hypotheses and precise parame-ter validation. Summary. The comprehensive improvements observed across all metrics and baseline methods—achieved under a controlled time budget (1800 seconds)—confirm that our strategy serves as an effective, “plug-and-play” en-hancer. By addressing the critical bottleneck of parameter optimization, it enables existing SR frameworks to realize their full potential without necessitating modifications to the symbolic search logic itself. 

## 6.3 Quantifying Evaluator Fidelity in LLM-SR 

We further analyze the identical LLM-SR runs reported above to understand how the inner-loop evaluator affects the closed-loop symbolic search. LLM-SR serves as an optimal setting for this analysis: each iteration consists of a candidate generated by the LLM, followed by numerical parameter fit-ting; the resulting score is then fed back into the subsequent search process. Consequently, inaccurate parameter fitting can distort the feedback signal observed by the outer loop. Throughout this analysis, the LLM, prompt template, ran-dom seed, deployment environment, outer-loop code, and the budget of 1000 calls are kept strictly fixed. The only algorithmic intervention introduced is the replacement of the original BFGS-based evaluator with SAGE-Fit. Because the scores of the evaluator are utilized as feedback, the two search trajectories are expected to diverge following the ini-tial scoring discrepancy; this divergence constitutes a core component of the measured effect. 

Task-level log-ratio improvement. We first quantify the final performance improvement achieved by replacing the Domain Log-Ratio Mean Log-Ratio Median Avg. Lost Rate (%) Max Lost Rate (%) 

Biology 2.52 1.91 24.06 61.79 Chemistry 4.09 1.59 22.35 44.35 Physics 1.39 0.69 6.39 20.79 Material Science 5.84 5.67 47.81 65.75 Table 2: Fine-grained diagnostics on LLM-SR trajectories.                 

> Evaluator Lost Rate Mean log NMSE Median log NMSE Time
> SAGE-Fit 8.0% -3.794 -3.728 0.73s
> lm trf multi 9.5% -3.786 -3.705 0.84s
> bfgs multi 51.5% -2.470 -2.508 0.37s

Table 3: Candidate-level fitting performance on the Structure-Progress Bank. SPB contains 200 progress-associated candidate equations extracted from real search trajectories. Lower Lost Rate and lower log NMSE are bet-ter. original evaluator with SAGE-Fit. For each task i, we define the log-scale improvement in NMSE as 

ρi = log 10 

 NMSE LLM -SR ,i 

NMSE LLM -SR+SAGE ,i 



. (13) A value of ρi > 0 indicates that SAGE-Fit achieves a lower final NMSE, whereas the magnitude of ρi corresponds to the reduction in error by orders of magnitude. For instance, 

ρi = 2 indicates a 100-fold reduction in NMSE. We report both the mean and the median of ρi across all tasks. The median reflects the typical improvement at the task level, whereas the mean captures the overall shift in the improve-ment distribution and remains susceptible to extreme base-line failures. 

Refit-based lost rate. Although the log-ratio improve-ment measures the final gains at the task level, it does not directly reveal whether the original evaluator missed promis-ing candidates during the search process. To diagnose this effect, we compute a refit-based lost rate based on the base-line LLM-SR trajectory. Let T = {e1, e 2, . . . , e T } denote the chronological sequence of candidate equations generated during a baseline LLM-SR run. We identify a subsequence of reference updates U = {u1, u 2, . . . }, wherein uk repre-sents a candidate that strictly improves the best-so-far loss under the original evaluator. For each interval following a reference update uk, we examine the set of discarded candi-dates Ck that failed to update the baseline incumbent solu-tion. Subsequently, we refit both the reference uk and each discarded candidate c ∈ C k utilizing SAGE-Fit, thereby ob-taining the respective losses LSAGE (uk) and LSAGE (c). A discarded candidate is classified as lost if it satisfies 

LSAGE (c) < L SAGE (uk). (14) This condition implies that the candidate would have outper-formed the incumbent solution under the high-fidelity eval-uator, even though it was not recognized as an improvement by the original evaluator. The lost rate is formally defined as 

LostRate = 

P

> k

P 

> c∈C k

I[LSAGE (c) < L SAGE (uk)] 

Ncompared 

,

(15) where Ncompared denotes the total number of discarded can-didates for which both the candidate and the reference up-date can be successfully refitted. This metric serves as a counterfactual diagnostic of evaluator fidelity at the trajec-tory level, rather than a direct measurement of the quality of the final formula. Table 2 presents two complementary aspects of evaluator fidelity. First, the median of the log-ratio is positive across all domains, indicating that a typi-cal task benefits from the replacement of the original eval-uator with SAGE-Fit. This effect is most pronounced in the domain of Material Science, where the median log-ratio reaches 5.67 , which corresponds to a reduction in NMSE by more than five orders of magnitude. The domains of Biol-ogy and Chemistry also exhibit substantial median improve-ments, achieving median log-ratios of 1.91 and 1.59 , respec-tively. The domain of Physics exhibits a more moderate yet consistently positive median improvement of 0.69 , suggest-ing that for highly oscillatory tasks, the remaining bottleneck may increasingly reside in the proposal of structures rather than solely in the parameter fitting process. Second, the refit-based lost rate demonstrates that the original evaluator can significantly distort decisions during the search process. A high lost rate indicates that numerous candidates discarded by the baseline trajectory emerge as highly competitive after being refitted by SAGE-Fit. This observation provides di-rect empirical support for the “Good Structure, Bad Score” hypothesis: promising expressions can be successfully gen-erated by the outer loop, yet they fail to guide the subsequent search because their parameters are not fitted with sufficient fidelity. This effect reaches its peak in the domain of Mate-rial Science, where the average lost rate escalates to 47 .81% .Overall, this analysis demonstrates that SAGE-Fit enhances LLM-SR through two interrelated mechanisms. At the level of the final output, it shifts the distribution of the task-level NMSE by multiple orders of magnitude across several do-mains. At the trajectory level, it mitigates the incidence of evaluator-induced false negatives by recovering structurally correct candidates that the original evaluator failed to score competitively. These results corroborate the perspective that the fidelity of the inner-loop evaluator constitutes a major bottleneck in closed-loop LLM-guided symbolic regression. 6.4 Structure-Progress Bank: Candidate-Level Missed Progress 

The trajectory-level diagnostics in Section 6.3 reveal that in-accurate inner-loop evaluation can distort the closed-loop search process. To further isolate this effect at the candi-date level, we construct a diagnostic benchmark, termed the Structure-Progress Bank (SPB). Unlike standard SR benchmarks that evaluate only the final output of a search algorithm, SPB focuses on candidate equations that arise within real search trajectories and are associated with ob-servable score improvements during the search process. Specifically, we extract 200 candidate equations from 20 problems, with 10 progress-associated candidates per prob-lem. Each selected candidate corresponds to an event in which the search trajectory exhibits an improvement in score, making the resulting bank a targeted collection of structures that the outer loop has already found potentially useful. Each candidate is represented as a callable sym-bolic expression with free continuous parameters. The num-ber of parameters ranges from 2 to 11, with a median of 7. All optimizers are evaluated from the same cold-start initialization, θ0 = 1, so that SPB measures the abil-ity of an evaluator to recover a useful fit without rely-ing on trajectory-specific warm starts. We compare three evaluators: the traditional multi-start L-BFGS-B baseline (bfgs multi ), a stronger multi-start trust-region least-squares baseline ( lm trf multi ), and SAGE-Fit with function-space farthest-point start selection (FS-FPS). Both SAGE-Fit and lm trf multi use the same number of fi-nal local solver calls ( K = 8 ), while SAGE-Fit additionally performs a lightweight function-space oversampling step to select diverse starts. This setup allows us to distinguish the benefit of function-space start selection from the benefit of simply using multiple local restarts. 

Empirical reference score and SPB lost rate. For each candidate equation Ti, we define an empirical reference score as the best NMSE achieved by any of the compared evaluators: 

Oemp (Ti) = min  

> o∈O

So(Ti),

O = {bfgs multi , lm trf multi , SAGE-Fit }.

(16) where So(Ti) denotes the NMSE obtained by optimizer o

on candidate Ti. We emphasize that Oemp is not a global oracle; it is a best-achieved empirical reference among the evaluated optimizers. An optimizer is considered to miss a candidate if its fitted NMSE is substantially worse than this empirical reference: 

LostRate SPB (o; τ ) = #{Ti : So(Ti) > τ · Oemp (Ti)}|B SPB | ,

(17) where τ = 3 .0 in our experiments. This metric captures candidate-level missed progress: a high lost rate indicates that an evaluator often assigns poor scores to candidates that other evaluators can fit substantially better. Table 3 shows that SAGE-Fit substantially reduces missed-progress candidates compared with the traditional multi-start L-BFGS-B evaluator. The lost rate decreases from 51 .5% to 8.0% , representing an 84 .5% relative reduc-tion. The comparison with lm trf multi is more subtle. The two methods achieve nearly identical bulk fitting accu-racy: their mean log NMSE differs by only 0.008 . However, SAGE-Fit attains a slightly lower SPB lost rate, 8.0% versus 

9.5% . We also observe that the difficulty of SPB increases with parameter dimension. For candidates with at most six parameters, both SAGE-Fit and lm trf multi rarely miss progress-associated candidates. For higher-dimensional can-didates, the lost rate increases for both TRF-based methods, while bfgs multi remains consistently fragile across al-most all dimensions. This pattern suggests that parameter dimensionality alone does not fully determine evaluator fail-ure; rather, failures arise from the interaction between di-mensionality, nonlinear parameterization, and basin acces-sibility. Overall, SPB provides candidate-level evidence for the mechanism underlying the end-to-end gains observed above. The benchmark shows that traditional optimizers can assign poor scores to candidate equations that are fit substan-tially better by SAGE-Fit. Against L-BFGS-B, this effect is large and systematic. Against a stronger TRF baseline, the advantage of SAGE-Fit is concentrated in tail robustness: it reduces the probability that a progress-associated candidate is missed due to unfavorable initialization or basin collapse. These results complement the trajectory-level lost-rate anal-ysis in Section 6.3 and further support the view that im-proving evaluator fidelity helps prevent promising symbolic structures from being discarded during search. 

# 7 Conclusion 

This work addresses a critical bottleneck in symbolic regres-sion (SR): the “Good Structure, Bad Score” phenomenon. An analysis of the optimization landscape reveals that the intrinsic non-convexity and the “needle-in-a-basin” topol-ogy of physical equations frequently cause standard contin-uous optimizers to fail. Consequently, these failures under-estimate the achievable scores and lead search algorithms to erroneously discard ground-truth structures. This misalign-ment hinders the discovery of complex scientific laws by systematically biasing the outer-loop search against highly promising candidates. To resolve this issue, we propose 

SAGE-Fit , an SR-native parameter evaluator that explicitly exploits the inherent structural and semantic priors of sym-bolic expressions. By integrating structure-aware dimen-sionality reduction with semantics-guided initialization and a specialized Projected Gauss–Newton method, SAGE-Fit overcomes the limitations of uniform parameter treatment. Integrated as a plug-and-play module into existing frame-works, this evaluator demonstrates superior performance. Extensive experiments establish that upgrading the inner-loop optimizer universally improves both symbolic accuracy and numerical fidelity without requiring alterations to the logic of the outer loop. Furthermore, evaluations utilizing the refit-based lost rate metric reveal that up to 65% of dis-carded candidates in certain domains could have been com-petitive had they been fitted with higher fidelity. References 

Alonso, C. L.; Montana, J. L.; and Borges, C. E. 2009. Evo-lution strategies for constants optimization in genetic pro-gramming. In 2009 21st IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence , 703–707. IEEE. Billard, L.; and Diday, E. 2002. Symbolic regression anal-ysis. In Classification, clustering, and data analysis: recent advances and applications , 281–288. Springer. Brunton, S. L.; Proctor, J. L.; and Kutz, J. N. 2016a. Discov-ering governing equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences , 113(15): 3932–3937. Brunton, S. L.; Proctor, J. L.; and Kutz, J. N. 2016b. Sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics with control (SINDYc). 

IFAC-PapersOnLine , 49(18): 710–715. Burlacu, B.; Kronberger, G.; and Kommenda, M. 2020. Operon C++ an efficient genetic programming framework for symbolic regression. In Proceedings of the 2020 ge-netic and evolutionary computation conference companion ,1562–1570. Cerny, B. M.; Nelson, P. C.; and Zhou, C. 2008. Using differ-ential evolution for symbolic regression and numerical con-stant creation. In Proceedings of the 10th annual conference on Genetic and evolutionary computation , 1195–1202. Cranmer, M. 2023. Interpretable Machine Learn-ing for Science with PySR and SymbolicRegression.jl. arXiv:2305.01582. Dong, J.; Zhong, J.; Liu, W.-L.; and Zhang, J. 2024. Evolv-ing equation learner for symbolic regression. IEEE Trans-actions on Evolutionary Computation .dos Reis, L.; Caminha, V.; and Penna, T. 2024. Benchmark-ing symbolic regression constant optimization schemes. 

arXiv e-prints , arXiv–2412. Gill, P. E.; and Murray, W. 1978. Algorithms for the solution of the nonlinear least-squares problem. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis , 15(5): 977–992. Golub, G. H.; and Pereyra, V. 2003. Separable nonlinear least squares: the variable projection method and its appli-cations. Inverse problems , 19(2): R1. Grayeli, A.; Sehgal, A.; Reyes, O. C.; Cranmer, M.; and Chaudhuri, S. 2024. Symbolic Regression with a Learned Concept Library. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Guo, Z.; Wang, S.; Tian, Y.; Yang, J.; Yu, H.; Na, X.; Kov´ acs, L.; Li, L.; Ioannou, P. A.; and Wang, F.-Y. 2025. SR-LLM: An incremental symbolic regression framework driven by LLM-based retrieval-augmented generation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 122(52): e2516995122. Hayes, C. F.; Da Silva, F. L.; Yang, J.; Mundhenk, T. N.; Lee, C. S.; Pettit, J. F.; Santiago, C.; Kim, S.; Kim, J. T.; Solis, I. A.; et al. 2025. Deep Symbolic Optimization: Reinforce-ment Learning for Symbolic Mathematics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10762 .Hua, Y.; Li, R.; Yao, J.; Zhuang, G.; Tang, S.; Liu, B.; Ouyang, W.; and Lu, Y. 2025. Finetuning Large Language Model as an Effective Symbolic Regressor. arXiv:2508.09897. Huang, Z.; Huang, D. Z.; Xiao, T.; Ma, D.; Ming, Z.; Shi, H.; and Wen, Y. 2025. Improving Monte Carlo Tree Search for Symbolic Regression. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Ioannou, P.; Li` o, P.; and Cicuta, P. 2026. An Empirical In-vestigation of Neural ODEs and Symbolic Regression for Dynamical Systems. arXiv:2601.20637. Kamienny, P.-A.; Lample, G.; Lamprier, S.; and Virgolin, M. 2023. Deep generative symbolic regression with monte-carlo-tree-search. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 15655–15668. PMLR. Kammerer, L.; Kronberger, G.; and Kommenda, M. 2022. Symbolic regression with fast function extraction and non-linear least squares optimization. In International Con-ference on Computer Aided Systems Theory , 139–146. Springer. Kantor, D.; Von Zuben, F. J.; and de Franca, F. O. 2021. Sim-ulated annealing for symbolic regression. In proceedings of the genetic and evolutionary computation conference , 592– 599. Kommenda, M.; Burlacu, B.; Kronberger, G.; and Affen-zeller, M. 2020. Parameter identification for symbolic re-gression using nonlinear least squares. Genetic Program-ming and Evolvable Machines , 21(3): 471–501. Koza, J. R. 1994. Genetic programming as a means for programming computers by natural selection. Statistics and computing , 4(2): 87–112. Kronberger, G.; and de Franca, F. O. 2025. Effects of re-ducing redundant parameters in parameter optimization for symbolic regression using genetic programming. Journal of Symbolic Computation , 129: 102413. Landajuela, M.; Lee, C.; Yang, J.; Glatt, R.; Santiago, C. P.; Aravena, I.; Mundhenk, T. N.; Mulcahy, G.; and Petersen, B. K. 2022. A Unified Framework for Deep Symbolic Re-gression. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems .Li, W.; Li, W.; Yu, L.; Wu, M.; Sun, L.; Liu, J.; Li, Y.; Wei, S.; Yusong, D.; and Hao, M. 2024. A Neural-Guided Dy-namic Symbolic Network for Exploring Mathematical Ex-pressions from Data. In Salakhutdinov, R.; Kolter, Z.; Heller, K.; Weller, A.; Oliver, N.; Scarlett, J.; and Berkenkamp, F., eds., Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 235 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , 28222–28242. PMLR. Loebl, J.; and Rozinajov´ a, V. 2018. Continuous Cartesian Genetic Programming with Particle Swarm Optimization. In 

International Conference on Intelligent Systems Design and Applications , 985–995. Springer. Makke, N.; and Chawla, S. 2024. Interpretable scientific discovery with symbolic regression: a review. Artificial In-telligence Review , 57(1): 2. Martius, G.; and Lampert, C. H. 2016. Extrapolation and learning equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.02995 .McConaghy, T. 2011. FFX: Fast, scalable, deterministic symbolic regression technology. In Genetic Programming Theory and Practice IX , 235–260. Springer. Merler, M.; Haitsiukevich, K.; Dainese, N.; and Marttinen, P. 2024. In-Context Symbolic Regression: Leveraging Large Language Models for Function Discovery. In Fu, X.; and Fleisig, E., eds., Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 4: Student Research Workshop) , 427–444. Bangkok, Thailand: Association for Computational Linguistics. ISBN 979-8-89176-097-4. Petersen, B. K.; Landajuela, M.; Mundhenk, T. N.; Santi-ago, C. P.; Kim, S. K.; and Kim, J. T. 2021. Deep symbolic regression: Recovering mathematical expressions from data via risk-seeking policy gradients. In Proc. of the Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations .Riley, A. B.; Webb, M.; and Baker, M. L. 2025. Deflation Techniques for Finding Multiple Local Minima of a Non-linear Least Squares Problem. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , 47(5): A2963–A2987. Sahoo, S.; Lampert, C.; and Martius, G. 2018. Learning equations for extrapolation and control. In International Conference on Machine Learning , 4442–4450. Pmlr. Schmidt, M.; and Lipson, H. 2009. Distilling free-form natu-ral laws from experimental data. science , 324(5923): 81–85. Sergeyev, Y. D.; Kvasov, D. E.; and Mukhametzhanov, M. S. 2016. On the least-squares fitting of data by sinusoids. In 

Advances in stochastic and deterministic global optimiza-tion , 209–226. Springer. Sheta, A.; Abdel-Raouf, A.; Fraihat, K. M.; and Baareh, A. 2023. Evolutionary Design of a PSO-Tuned Multigene Sym-bolic Regression Genetic Programming Model for River Flow Forecasting. Int. J. Adv. Comput. Sci. Appl , 14: 806– 814. Shojaee, P.; Meidani, K.; Gupta, S.; Farimani, A. B.; and Reddy, C. K. 2025. LLM-SR: Scientific Equation Discov-ery via Programming with Large Language Models. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Represen-tations .Stinstra, E.; Rennen, G.; and Teeuwen, G. 2008. Metamod-eling by symbolic regression and Pareto simulated anneal-ing. Structural and Multidisciplinary Optimization , 35(4): 315–326. Udrescu, S.-M.; and Tegmark, M. 2020. AI Feynman: A physics-inspired method for symbolic regression. Science advances , 6(16): eaay2631. Vaddireddy, H.; and San, O. 2019. Equation discovery using fast function extraction: a deterministic symbolic regression approach. Fluids , 4(2): 111. Virgolin, M.; Alderliesten, T.; and Bosman, P. A. 2019. Lin-ear scaling with and within semantic backpropagation-based genetic programming for symbolic regression. In Proceed-ings of the genetic and evolutionary computation confer-ence , 1084–1092. Zhang, H.; Chen, Q.; XUE, B.; Banzhaf, W.; and Zhang, M. 2025. RAG-SR: Retrieval-Augmented Generation for Neu-ral Symbolic Regression. In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations .

# A SAGE-Fit Algorithm 

The complete procedure of the SAGE-Fit evaluator de-scribed in Section 5.5 is presented in Algorithm 1. It integrates the three modules—structure-aware dimension-ality reduction, semantics-guided initialization, and SR-specialized local attraction—into a unified pipeline that takes a candidate equation T together with data (X, y) and returns a faithful score bS(T ) along with the fitted parameters 

(ˆ α, ˆβ).

Algorithm 1 SAGE-Fit Evaluator 

Require: Candidate T , data (X, y), bounds [ℓ, u ], oversam-pling parameter M = 100 , number of starting points 

K = 8 

Ensure: Faithful score bS(T ) and parameters (ˆ α, ˆβ) 

> 1:

Module 1: Structure-Aware Dimensionality Reduc-tion  

> 2:

(α, β, Φ, c ) ← ASTA FFINE PROPAGATION (T ) ▷

Eqs. (7)–(8)  

> 3:

Module 2: Semantics-Guided Initialization  

> 4:

Sample M candidates {βm}Mm=1 around the warm-start initialization within [ℓ, u ] 

> 5:

for m = 1 , . . . , M do  

> 6:

fm ← fT (X; α⋆(βm), β m) ▷ Function-space evaluation  

> 7:

end for  

> 8:

{βi1 , . . . , β iK } ← FARTHEST POINT SAMPLING ({fm}, K )

▷ Eq. (11)  

> 9:

Module 3: SR-Specialized Local Attraction  

> 10:

for k = 1 , . . . , K in parallel do  

> 11:

ˆβk ← PROJECTED TRF (βik , L proj ) ▷

Eqs. (9),(10),(12)  

> 12:

end for  

> 13:

ˆβ ← arg min β∈{ ˆβ1,..., ˆβK } Lproj (β) 

> 14:

ˆα ← α⋆( ˆβ) via Eq. (9)  

> 15:

bS(T ) ← Lproj ( ˆβ) 

> 16:

return ( bS(T ), ˆα, ˆβ)

# B LSR-Synth Dataset 

The LSR-Synth dataset is designed to evaluate the true scientific equation discovery capability of large language model (LLM) based SR systems beyond memorization. Un-like benchmarks derived from well-known textbook equa-tions, LSR-Synth introduces discovery-driven problems by combining established scientific terms with carefully con-structed synthetic terms that are novel yet physically plausi-ble. 

Scientific Domains LSR-Synth spans four scientific do-mains: chemistry, biology, physics, and material science. Chemistry problems focus on reaction kinetics and non-linear concentration–time dynamics. Biology tasks empha-size population dynamics and growth processes with non-linear regulatory effects. Physics equations are primarily drawn from dynamical systems, including oscillators, damp-ing processes, and time-dependent forcing. Material science tasks cover stress–strain relationships, constitutive laws, and nonlinear material responses. Each domain is selected to re-flect realistic scientific modeling scenarios while maintain-ing diversity in equation structure and operator usage. The final LSR-Synth dataset contains 128 problems across these four domains. 

Equation Construction Pipeline The construction of LSR-Synth follows a multi-stage pipeline designed to en-sure novelty, solvability, and scientific plausibility: 

(1) Scientific Problem Selection. Representative scien-tific problems are first selected within each domain (e.g., reaction kinetics in chemistry or population growth in biol-ogy), along with a corresponding set of variables and physi-cal interpretations. 

(2) Known Term Generation. Given the problem de-scription, a large language model is prompted to generate a set of commonly used and well-established mathematical terms that typically appear in standard formulations of the underlying scientific model. 

(3) Synthetic Term Generation. In parallel, the LLM is prompted to generate synthetic terms that are novel in the given scientific context. These terms are designed to be mathematically valid and physically interpretable but are not part of standard textbook equations. Examples include higher-order nonlinearities, saturation effects, or unconven-tional time-dependent modulations. 

(4) Equation Assembly and Solvability Check. Known terms and synthetic terms are combined into complete math-ematical expressions. Each candidate equation is then veri-fied for analytical or numerical solvability using numerical solvers (e.g., ODE solvers). Equations that are ill-posed or numerically unstable are discarded. 

(5) Novelty Verification. To prevent trivial rediscovery or memorization, each constructed equation is evaluated for novelty using an LLM-based evaluator, which determines whether the equation requires data-driven reasoning rather than direct recall of known scientific laws. 

(6) Data Generation. For equations that pass solvability and novelty checks, synthetic datasets are generated by nu-merically evaluating the equations under predefined param-eter ranges and initial conditions. Both in-domain and out-of-domain (OOD) test sets are created when applicable to assess generalization. 

(7) Expert Validation. Finally, the equations and their generated data are manually reviewed by subject matter ex-perts to ensure scientific plausibility and consistency with the stated problem context. 

Symbolic Accuracy (SA) Symbolic Accuracy (SA) is the primary metric used to evaluate whether a discovered equa-tion is symbolically equivalent to the ground-truth equa-tion in LSR-Synth. Unlike traditional SR recovery metrics that rely on exact string matching, SA focuses on semantic equivalence. Specifically, SA is computed using an LLM-based evaluator that compares the predicted equation and the ground-truth equation after removing numerical constants and fitted parameters. The evaluator determines whether the two expressions represent the same underlying mathemat-ical relationship up to algebraic equivalence and parame-terization. This evaluation protocol accounts for variations in expression form (e.g., reordering of terms or alternative but equivalent formulations) and is particularly well-suited for LLM-based equation discovery systems that may output equations in diverse symbolic representations. The reliabil-ity of SA is validated through comparison with human ex-pert judgments, showing high agreement.