Title: 2605.03511v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.03511v1

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 00:41:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
1

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

# Meta -Inverse Physics -Informed Neural Networks for 

# High -Dimensional  Ordinary Differential Equation s

Zhao Wei , Kenneth Hor Cheng Koh , Sheng Yuan Chin , James Chun Yip Chan , Chin Chun Ooi ,

and  Yew -Soon Ong , Fellow , IEEE 

Abstract —Solving inverse problems in dynamical systems 

governed by  high -dimensional  coupled ordinary differential 

equations (ODEs)  is  a ubiquitous  challenge in scientific machine 

learning.  In many real -world applications , researchers  seek  to 

uncover unknown parameters or  model unknown  dynamics  even 

as  the underlying physi cs is  only partially  characterized, and 

observations are sparse and limited to specific measurable 

channels . While  physics -informed neural networks (PINNs) are 

ideal for inverse inference under partial observability, e xisting 

PINNs typically rely on task -specific joint optimization, which 

suffers from  optimization difficulties  and poor generalization.  In 

this  paper , we propose a meta -inverse physics -informed neural 

network (MI -PINN) that reformulates inverse modeling as a two -

stage meta -learning problem.  MI -PINN first learns a physics -

aware representation across multiple tasks, and then performs 

inverse  modeling  by  optimizing  task -specific unknowns while 

keeping the  learned  representation fixed . Th is  two -stage 

formulation  significantly reduces the  parameter search dimension ,

thereby  improving  sample  efficiency  and  enabling  accurate 

inference.  To handle  multi -scale  dynamics  common in  these  high -

dimensional ODE systems , we  further  introduce an adaptive 

clustering -based multi -branch  learning scheme . We demonstrate 

the effectiveness of MI -PINN on  whole -body physiologically based 

pharmacokinetic (PBPK) models with up to 33 coupled ODEs ,

using paracetamol and theophylline under intravenous and oral 

dosing scenarios . Experimental results show that MI -PINN 

enables  accurate recovery of masked kinetic parameters and 

reconstruction of missing  mechanistic  terms  despite  limited 

clinical observations.  Compared with conventional solver -based 

optimization and standard inverse PINN baseline s, MI -PINN 

consistently achieves  up to two -orders -of -magnitude reductions  in 

parameter estimation error  while improving  computational 

efficiency . These results highlight MI -PINN as a generalizable 

framework for  data -efficient  inverse  inference  and discovery of 

unknown  mechanisms  in real -world  high -dimensional  coupled 

ODE  systems, including for whole -body PBPK  with potential 

application to drug discovery .

This research was partially supported by the A*STAR Catalyst Project for 

Artificial Intelligence in Drug Discovery (AIDD) Programme (Grant No. 

H25MHP1489) and the A*STAR under BMRC CSF (Grant No. C240314053) .

Zhao Wei is with the Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR) and  the 

Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Science, 

Technology and Research (A*STAR ),  1 Fusionopolis Way, #16 -16 Connexis, 

Singapore 138632, Singapore  (e -mail:  Wei _Zhao @a-star.edu.sg ). 

Kenneth Hor Cheng Koh  and  Sheng Yuan Chin  are  with the  Singapore 

Institute of Food and Biotechnology Innovation (SIFBI), Agency for Science, 

Technology and Research (A*STAR), 31 Biopolis Way, Nanos, Singapore 

138669, Singapore  (e -mail:  Koh_Hor_Cheng@a -star.edu.sg ,

Chin_Sheng_Yuan@a -star.edu.sg ). 

James Chun Yip Chan  is with the  Singapore Institute of Food and 

Biotechnology Innovation (SIFBI), Agency for Science, Technology and 

Index Terms —physics -informed neural network s; meta -inverse 

learning ; high -dimensional  ordinary differential equation s; data -

efficient discovery ; physiologically based pharmacokinetic 

modeling 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

NVERSE  learning in high -dimensional dynamical systems 

is a fundamental challeng e in scientific machine learning 

[1] . In many real -world applications, unknown physical 

parameters or missing mechanisms must be inferred from 

sparse and noisy observations,  even as  system dynamics are 

governed by  high -dimensional , tightly coupled nonlinear 

ordinary  differential equations  (ODEs)  [2] . This problem is 

compounded by the fact that many such systems exhibit only 

partial observability, i.e. , measurements occur in a limited 

subset of the physical state variables.  These  inverse problems 

are often ill -posed, highly non -convex, and strongly sensitive to 

model structure and data availability, making stable and reliable 

inference particularly difficult  [3] . Hence, pure data -driven 

learning methodologies struggle  when applied  to such complex 

systems,  frequently  overfitting to the sparse data and /or 

generating physically inconsistent predictions  [4] .

Physics -informed neural networks (PINNs) have recently 

emerged as a promising alternative for solving inverse 

problems governed by differential equations  [5 -8] . By 

embedding known physical laws directly into the training 

objective, PINNs enable the simultaneous learning of system 

states, unknown parameters, and even missing dynamical 

components, while respecting the underlying mechanistic 

constraints  [9] . However, existing PINN -based approaches 

largely formulate inverse modeling as a task -specific joint 

optimization problem, where neural network parameters and 

unknown physical variables are optimized simultaneously for 

each individual system  [5, 10] . This formulation becomes 

increasingly problematic in high -dimensional ODE systems, 

Research (A*STAR), 31 Biopolis Way, Nanos, Singapore 138669, Singapore 

and the  A*STAR Skin Research Labs (A*SRL), Agency for Science, 

Technology and Research (A*STAR), 8A Biomedical Grove, Immunos, 

Singapore 138648, Singapore  (e -mail: James_Chan@a -star.edu.sg) .

Chin Chun  Ooi  (Corresponding author ) is with the Centre for Frontier AI 

Research (CFAR) and the Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), 

Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), 1 Fusionopolis Way, 

#16 -16 Connexis, Singapore 138632, Singapore (e -mail:  ooicc@a -star.edu.sg )

Yew -Soon  Ong  is with the Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR) and  the 

Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC), Agency for Science, 

Technology and Research (A*STAR ),  1 Fusionopolis Way, #16 -16 Connexis, 

Singapore 138632, Singapore  and the  College of Computing and Data Science 

(CCDS), Nanyang Technological University (NTU), 50 Nanyang Avenue, 

Singapore 639798, Singapore (e -mail: asysong@ntu.edu.sg). 

# I2

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

where strong coupling  and  multi -scale dynamics and state 

behaviors lead to highly complex loss landscapes and poor 

optimization stability  [11] . In addition , these approaches  exhibit 

limited generalization  across tasks . Models trained on one 

system or parameter setting  typically need to be retrained from 

scratch  and  cannot be directly reused for new tasks , even when 

they share similar underlying physics  [12] . Consequently, their 

scalability for inverse design and discovery in complex 

dynamical systems remains limited .

These limitations suggest that inverse learning should move 

beyond task -specific optimization and instead exploit shared 

structures across related dynamical systems. In many practical 

settings, different systems can be viewed as variations of a 

common unde rlying process, sharing similar dynamics but 

differing in  partially characterized  parameter s or mechanisms. 

Meta -learning provides a natural framework to capture such 

shared structure by learning representations that can be reused 

across tasks, improving data efficiency and generalization  [13] .

However, its application to physics -informed inverse problems 

remains limited, especially in high -dimensional ODE systems. 

The tight coupling between representation learning and 

physics -constrained optimization, together with multi -scale 

dynamics, makes  it difficult to obtain generalizable solutions. 

To address these challenges, we propose a meta -inverse 

physics -informed neural network (MI -PINN) that reformulates 

inverse learning in high -dimensional  coupled  ODE  systems as 

a two -stage learning problem.  By decoupling representation 

learning  and  inverse  modeling , MI -PINN reduces the 

optimization space and supports efficient cross -task adaptation. 

To rigorously evaluate the proposed  MI -PINN  framework  on a 

real -world complex and high -dimensional ODE system , we 

consider  whole -body physiologically based pharmacokinetic 

(PBPK) models. While traditionally studied in pharmacology, 

mathematically, whole -body PBPK systems represent an 

exceptionally demanding benchmark for scientific machine 

learning  [14] . They consist of  multiple  tightly coupled ODEs 

characterized by varying temporal scales, highly  nonlinear 

interaction terms, and extreme partial observability . In practice ,

the ODE system can contain more than 100 equations, even as 

only a single state variable (such as venous blood 

concentration) is  directly  measurable. Successfully performing 

parameter inference and /or  neural -symbolic missing term 

discovery  under such conditions  is  not only  challenging , but 

also  carries real -world practical implications . Drug 

development remains a costly and protracted endeavour, with 

poor pharmacokinetics (PK)  being  a major contributor  to the 

high attrition rate  in drug development,  accounting for 

approximately 40% of clinical failures  [15, 16] , making 

accurate inverse inference from limited clinical observations 

especially compelling  [17] .

The main contributions are listed as below. 

1) We propose a MI -PINN  framework  that decouples 

representation learning  and  inverse inference  as  a two -stage 

formulation , enabl ing  data -efficient inverse inference  under 

limited data and partial observability . This transforms inverse 

learning in high -dimensional ODE systems from a joint 

optimization problem  with search space dimension  Nθ (network 

weights ) + Nα (task -specific unknowns ) into  a substantially 

reduced inference problem with dimension  Nα (Nθ >>  Nα). In 

addition,  MI -PINN  achieves accurate inverse modeling  with as 

few as 10 observations from a single state variable, 

demonstrating improved sample efficiency in high -dimensional 

settings. 

2) A multi -branch representation  scheme  is proposed  to 

capture  multi -scale  dynamics  common  in coupled ODE systems 

through an  adaptive clustering -based  learning  strategy . This is 

crucial  to  overcome  optimization difficulties  due to spectral 

bias that complicate PINN optimization  in the presence of 

multi -scale dynamics . In addition , we introduce  a physics -

informed pseudo -inverse formulation that computes the final 

layer in closed form  to improve training stability .

3)  The proposed MI -PINN framework provides a unified 

approach for both parameter inference and missing mechanism 

discovery from limited observations  in  inverse modeling . We 

further  demonstrate  the  practical scalability of the MI -PINN 

framework on  complex,  high -dimensional  whole -body  PBPK 

models with  up to  33 ODEs under intravenous  (IV)  and oral 

dosing scenarios. Experiments on paracetamol and theophylline 

consistently yield  accurate parameter inference under sparse 

and noisy observations, as well as successful reconstruction of 

missing mechanistic terms  at hitherto unprecedented scale .

The rest of this  paper  is organized as follows.  Section II 

reviews  related  work . Section III  presents  the proposed MI -

PINN  framework . Section IV  introduces its application  to 

inverse PBPK  modeling . Section V  reports  the  experimental 

results on paracetamol and theophylline PBPK systems under 

both  IV  and oral dosing scenarios, covering parameter inference 

and missing  term discovery . Finally, Section V I concludes the 

paper and discusses future directions .

II.  RELATED  WORKS 

A.  Inverse Modeling in  ODE  Systems 

Inverse modeling  and system identification  in ODE systems 

aim to infer unknown parameters or governing mechanisms 

from observed system trajectories, and has been widely studied 

in  many areas of science and engineering  [18] . Traditional 

approaches typically rely on numerical solvers coupled with 

optimization techniques, such as least -squares fitting or 

gradient -based methods, to estimate model parameters  [18] .

While effective for small -scale systems, these methods often 

struggle with high -dimensional, strongly coupled dynamics due 

to non -convex optimization landscapes and sensitivity to 

initialization  and the computational cost of  numerical  solvers .

With the rise of machine learning, data -driven approaches 

have been explored  for  modeling dynamical systems and 

addressing  inverse problems , including neural ODEs  [19] ,

universal differential equations  [20] , and neural operator s [21] .

However, purely data -driven methods typically require large 

amounts of data and may produce physically inconsistent 

solutions under sparse or noisy observations . Moreover, most 

existing approaches treat each inverse problem independently, 

solving a new optimization problem for every system or 3

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

parameter configuration.  For example,  Li  et al.  [22]  developed 

gene expression programming to infer governing ODE models 

from observed data, improving efficiency and accuracy 

compared to traditional genetic programming approaches. 

Utkarsh  et al.  [23]  propose d a hybrid multi -start optimization 

strategy that combines particle swarm optimization and L -

BFGS to improve convergence in inverse problems for  ODE s. 

Chirigati  et al.  [24]  also  propose d a Gaussian process -based 

framework for inverse modeling in dynamical systems, 

enabling efficient parameter estimation and inference of 

unobserved components without requiring explicit numerical 

integration.  Despite these advances , such methods generally 

lack  generalization across tasks and  often  require retraining 

from scratch, even when the underlying dynamics are similar. 

This limitation becomes more pronounced in real -world 

complex  systems, where the underlying dynamics are high -

dimensional and only partially observed. A representative 

example is PBPK modeling . PBPK model construction 

frequently involves two key steps: (i) determination of drug -

specific ADME parameters, and (ii) constructing a system of 

ODEs that mathematically describes the physiological 

processes involved in ADME. Conventionally,  most parameter 

values  in mechanistic PBPK models are measured through  in 

vi tro  and  in vivo  experiments, while the remaining unknown 

parameters are empirically  estimated  through global 

optimization  from clinical data . The innate complexity of PBPK 

models often presents a scenario where there are many 

unknown parameters relative to the amount of information 

available , resulting in poor inference  [25] . This has driven the 

concurrent development of models for  first -principles 

estimation of key parameters  [26, 27] . However,  while the se 

estimates  can be used as  model  inputs, discrepancies between 

their simulation outcomes  and empirically observed profiles 

remain  an open challenge. 

Real -world problems  also frequently suffer from incomplete 

mechanistic knowledge  where  partial knowledge exists but 

construction of the complete system of equations purely from 

first principles  is impossible . This creates an impasse in the 

discovery and mathematical characterization of missing 

mechanistic terms  [28] , and  modelers  are compelled to 

supplement the system of ODEs with expert knowledge -derived 

hand -crafted mechanistic terms in order to proceed with 

conventional parameter estimation. This  also  remains  one of the 

most significant industry -wide challenges in PK predictions 

[29] .

B.  Physics -Informed Neural Network s

PINNs have emerged as a powerful  approach  for solving 

ODE -governed problems by embedding known physical laws 

into the learning objective  [30] . Unlike purely data -driven 

models,  PINNs incorporate the governing equations together 

with  initial conditions (ICs ) into a unified optimization 

framework, enabling physically consistent predictions even 

when observational data  is  limited or unavailable  [31] . This 

property makes PINNs particularly attractive for scientific and 

engineering applications where mechanistic knowledge is 

available but measurements are sparse or noisy  [32] .

However, most PINN -based approaches formulate inverse 

modeling as a joint optimization problem, where neural 

network parameters and unknown physical variables are 

optimized simultaneously for each task. This often leads to 

training instability, especially  in high -dimensional ODE 

systems, and makes optimization sensitive to initialization and 

hyperparameters. More importantly, such formulations remain 

inherently task -specific and exhibit limited generalization 

across related systems, requiring retraining fro m scratch for 

new configurations. 

PINNs have been widely applied to inverse modeling in a 

variety of  dynamical  systems,  including  general physical 

system s [33, 34] , structural mechanics  [2] , power systems  [35] ,

population dynamics  [36] , and  cardiovascular systems  [37] . In 

particular, PINN -based inverse modeling in biomedical ODE 

systems has attracted increasing attention due to its direct 

relevance to real -world clinical applications, among which 

PBPK modeling plays a central role . For instance, 

Wickramasinghe  et al.  [38]  developed a PBPK -iPINN 

framework to estimate drug - or patient -specific parameters and 

concentration profiles in PBPK brain compartment models, 

where a  permeability -limited four -compartment structure was 

considered . Daryakenari  et al.  [28]  proposed AI -Aristotle, 

which combines PINNs with symbolic regression for parameter 

estimation and missing  term discovery, and demonstrated it on 

a three -compartment pharmacokinetics model and an ultradian 

glucose -insulin endocrine ODE system . Minadakis  [39]  applied 

PINNs to inverse parameter estimation in  an  eight -compartment 

PB PK model, identifying tissue partition coefficients from 

experimental biodistribution measurements . Nevertheless ,

existing studies remain limited to reduced or organ -specific 

compartmental models. To the best of our knowledge, PINNs 

have not yet been  demonstrated for  whole -body  PBPK 

modeling , which involves substantially higher -dimensional 

parameter spaces and more complex coupled ODE systems , and 

yet, is of the most practical relevance  for integration with real -

world clinical data .

III.  META -INVERSE  PHYSICS -INFORMED  NEURAL  NETWORK 

In this section,  we introduce  MI -PINN,  a two -stage 

framework for inverse learning in high -dimensional ODE 

systems . MI -PINN first learns  the  representation across 

multiple tasks  in Stage I , and then performs inverse  modeling 

in Stage II  by optimizing only task -specific unknowns while 

keeping the learned representation fixed. This formulation 

transforms the original joint optimization problem into a more 

structured inference process, leading to improved 

generalization and data efficiency.  The overall workflow of MI -

PINN is illustrated in  Fig.  1.

A.  Problem Formulation and Task Construction 

ODE systems are widely used to model the dynamics of 

complex systems. A general nonlinear parameterized system 

can be  expressed as 4

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < ( ) ( )

##  

## ( )

( )

 

## ( ) ( )

##  

> 0Data

; ; , 0, 0; , 0; ; , 0, 

u t t Tu u tu t u t T

  =    = =   =   

ξ ξξ ξξ ξ

 

(1)

where ( )

;u t ξ denote s the state variable s;  ξ represents 

the  task -specific  system  parameters or different missing  term 

formulations used during training ; is the  set of  nonlinear 

differential  operator s defining the  dynamical  system ; is the 

corresponding  source term;  u0 is the IC;  uData  represents the 

sparse observations ; 

0, t T represents  the temporal variable. 

For  a given set of  task -specific  parameters  ξ, the 

corresponding  solution ( )

;u t ξ can be  obtained using 

conventional  numerical solvers . However, inverse tasks such as 

parameter estimation and missing  term discovery typically 

require repeated evaluations of the governing system under 

many different parameter configurations . Directly relying on 

numerical solvers for these evaluations  leads to  substantial 

computational cost , especially for  large -scale coupled 

dynamical systems . Therefore, a PINN  model  provides an 

efficient alternative for rapid and scalable evaluations. Physics -Informed Closed -Form Solution ( )   

> ()()

( )   

> ()()

( )   

> ()()

( )   

> ()()

( )

( )

( )                                                                                         

> ()
> ()
> ODE ODE
> ODE ODE
> ODE 1,ODE 1
> ODE ODE
> ODE ,ODE 1
> IC 0IC ,
> IC 0IC ,
> ;,;
> ;,;
> 0; ,
> 0; ,
> m s im s
> nm s im s n
> Sm s im s
> m s im s
> ftt
> ftt
> uf
> uf
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> =
> 
> 
> 
> =
> 
> 
> 
> ξξ
> θAωθb
> θξξ
> θξξ
> ξθξ
> ξθξ
> 
>  
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 

• Physics: ODE family with known  

> task -dependent parameter and
> structure variations ξ

• Initial conditions: predefined  

> initial states for each task ()

( ) ( )                  

> 1TT*
> 
> −
> =+
> ξξξξ
> θθθωθIAAAb
> ODE
> IC
> Time
> Concentration
> Cluster 1
> Cluster 2
> Cluster K
> Cluster 1
> state variables
> Cluster 2
> state variables
> Cluster K
> state variables
> Time t
> fm

Stage I: Multi -branch meta -representation learning 

Derive θ* (gradient descent)    

> Data loss + Physics losses (ODE + IC)
> Get ω*(closed form)

Final layer 

Stage II: Decoupled meta -inverse modeling 

Derive α* (gradient descent) 

Fig.  1 Overall  framework of MI -PINN . In Stage I,  MI -PINN  employs  a multi -branch  meta -representation  learning  scheme  to learn the 

representation  parameters  θ across  different training task  configurations  ξ to  derive  θ*. The  final  layer parameters  ω* are  computed via a 

physics -informed closed -form solution at each optimization step . In Stage II,  the learned representation  θ* is  fixed,  while the task -specific 

unknowns  α are optimized for inverse modeling  to  derive  α*. The final  layer parameters  are  consistently computed using the same physics -

informed closed -form solution , with  α replacing  ξ.

B.  Physics -Informed Learning Formulation 

For  a conventional PINN parameterized by  θ, the loss 

function PINN  typically  comprises  of  three components: the  IC 

loss IC  , the  ODE  residual  loss ODE  , and, when available, the 

data -fitting los sData  . The overall loss  can be  expressed  as ( ) ( )

# ( ) ( )( ) ( )           

> IC ODE Data
> 2IC 021IC 2ODE ODE 21OD PINN IC IC ODE ODE Data DaE2Data D ta Data 21ata ODE Da ata Dat

1 0; 1 ; ;1 ; ;  

> niniiiniii

u unu t tnu t u tn

 

> ===

+= −= −=+−=

# 

ξ ξξ ξξ ξ

 

 







(2)

where  λIC , λODE , and  λData  are the scaling  coefficients  for  the  IC, 

ODE,  and data  losses , respectively;  nIC , nODE , and  nData  denote 

the corresponding numbers of sampling points used for each 

term. 

The PINN can be trained using gradient -based optimization 

methods such as Adam or SGD to minimize the overall loss PINN 

. However, due to the highly non -convex and  tightly 

coupled nature of the physics -informed loss landscape, 

convergence is often slow and unstable compared with purely 

data -driven models  [40] . These challenges become even more 

severe in  large -scale coupled  ODE  systems , where different 

state variables  exhibit markedly distinct dynamic s, leading to 

additional  difficulties  in optimization.  Consequently,  such 

limitations make it difficult to directly extend conventional 

PINNs to  real -world inverse problems , thereby motivating the 

development of a meta -inverse framework such as MI -PINN .

C.  Two -Stage Meta -Learning Framework for Inverse 

Modeling 

To address  instability and  convergence  limitations of vanilla 

PINNs , MI -PINN adopts a two -stage meta -learning framework 

that first learns a shared physics -aware representation  and then 

performs inverse  modeling  using the learned representation .

The overall framework of MI -PINN is  also  depicted in  Fig.  1.

Stage I ( multi -branch  meta -representation learning ):  The 

model is trained across multiple tasks with varying parameter 

sets or missing  term formulations , with the objective of learning 

a shared  physics -aware representation  θ*. The optimization 

objective is formulated as ( ) 

> ()

## ( )  

> P**,INN

, arg min , ;p  =  ξ ξθ ω 

θ ω θ ω ξ  

(3)5

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

where  θ denotes  the  representation  parameters  (i.e.,  all network 

weights excluding the final layer );  ω represents the  final  layer 

parameter s.  In this stage, an  adaptive clustering -based multi -

branch representation learning  scheme  is  developed  to capture 

the diverse dynamical behaviors  across state variables , while  a

gradient -free  physics -informed closed -form update is 

developed  to stabilize the optimization of the final layer . These 

two components jointly enable consistent and robust 

representation learning,  as  detailed  in  Section  D.

Stage II ( decoupled meta -inverse modeling ):  For a new 

target  system, the learned representation  θ* is  kept fixed , and 

MI -PINN  solves the inverse problem  by optimizing only the 

task -specific  variables  using  the available  observations . The 

optimization problem is formulated as ( )

# ( )

> Invers *e

arg min , , ; 

= α

α α α θ θ



(4)

where  α denotes the task -specific unknowns to be identified 

during inverse modeling ;Inverse  denotes the corresponding 

inverse modeling loss . During this process, the final  layer 

parameters are updated through the same physics -informed 

closed -form solution, enabling stable and computation -efficient 

identification  even under sparse  obse rvations . The details are 

provided  in  Section  E.

The proposed two -stage MI -PINN framework improves 

both identifiability and training stability in inverse PBPK 

modeling under sparse observations. In conventional PINNs, 

high -dimensional network parameters and task -specific 

variables are optimized jointly,  resulting in a large and ill -

posed search space that hinders reliable parameter recovery 

and leads to unstable optimization. In contrast, MI -PINN 

first learns  the representation  θ* across multiple tasks, which 

constrains the solution space to a lower -dimen sional  space ,

thereby improving identifiability and yielding a better -

conditioned optimization problem. 

Proposition 1.  Under the learned representation  θ*, the 

inverse problem in Stage II reduces to identifying the task -

specific variables  α within a restricted hypothesis space, 

leading to improved identifiability compared with jointly 

optimizing all network parameters. 

Justification.  Since the  learned  representation  θ* is fixed, 

the model output can be expressed as a linear combination 

of learned basis functions with respect to the final layer 

parameters. As a result, the effective dimension of the search 

space is reduced from the full network parameter space to 

the dim ension of  α, making the inverse problem better 

conditioned under sparse observations. From an 

optimization perspective, MI -PINN decouples 

representation learning from inverse inference. During 

inverse model ing, only  α is optimized, while the final -layer 

parameters are computed via a physics -informed pseudo -

inverse corresponding to a regularized least -squares problem. 

Proposition 2.  The closed -form pseudo -inverse solution 

improves training stability by eliminating gradient -based 

updates for the final layer. 

Justification.  The pseudo -inverse provides the optimal 

solution to the linearized least -squares problem at each 

iteration, avoiding error accumulation from gradient -based 

updates and reducing sensitivity to the non -convex loss 

landscape. 

To provide a clearer overview of current  approaches, a 

detailed comparison of existing PINN -based methods for 

inverse modeling in  dynamical  systems  is summarized  in 

TABLE  I. From this comparison, it is evident that most existing 

works focus on low -dimensional systems and remain inherently 

task -specific, with limited generalization across related 

problems . In contrast, MI -PINN  is designed for high -

dimensional dynamical systems and supports cross -task 

adaptation  under limited observations .                                                                                     

> TABLE I
> SUMMARY OF PINN -BASED METHODS FOR INVERSE MODELING IN DYNAMICAL SYSTEMS
> Method System type Number of
> observations
> System
> dimension Inverse task Generalization
> FedPINN [33] General physical systems 10 00 1-3(low) Parameter inference Task -specific
> sf -PINN [34] General physical systems 200 -520251 1, 3 (low) Parameter inference Task -specific
> Beam PINN [2] Structural mechanics system s5000 1, 2 (low) Parameter inference and
> force identification Task -specific
> Microgrid PINN [35] Microgrid power system s-2(low) Parameter inference Task -specific
> Mosquito PINN [36] Mosquito population dynamics
> system s63 -3670 3, 10 (low) Parameter inference Task -specific
> Left ventricle PINN [37] Lumped cardiovascular system s-5(low) Parameter inference Task -specific
> PBPK -iPINN [38] PBPK systems 800 4(low) Parameter inference Task -specific
> AI -Aristotle [28] PBPK systems 10 -1800 3, 6 (low) Parameter inference and
> missing term discovery Task -specific
> PBPK PINN [39] PBPK systems -8(low) Parameter inference Task -specific
> MI -PINN (Ours) PBPK systems 10 22, 33
> (high)
> Parameter inference and
> missing term discovery
> Cross -task
> adaptation
> Note: “ -” indicates that the corresponding information is not explicitly reported in the original paper.

D.  Multi -Branch  Meta -Representation Learning 

To effectively learn  multi -scale  dynamical behaviors across 

different  compartments , MI -PINN incorporates an adaptive 

clustering -based multi -branch  learning scheme  as part of the 

meta -representation learning process.  This is also consistent 

with current recognition in literature that spectral bias during 

PINN training can greatly complicate the simultaneous learning 

of multiple frequency scales. The multi -branch  learning scheme 6

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

is therefore crucial for preventing gradient pathologies due to 

the  multi -scale  dynamical state variables. 

In MI -PINN,  the ODE states across tasks are first grouped 

into  K cluster s according to their dynamical similarity .

Specifically, for each state variable  us, we collect its trajectory 

sampled on the collocation time grid and represent it as a vector 

xs. We then compute the pairwise correlation coefficient  ρij  =

corr( xi, xj) between  state trajectories and define a correlation -

based distance metric  dij  = 1  - ρij . Based on the resulting distance 

matrix  D = [ dij ],  the  agglomerative hierarchical clustering  is 

used  to partition the ODE states into  K groups.  In this way, 

states exhibiting similar temporal profiles are assigned to the 

same cluster, enabling each branch to specialize in modeling a 

subset of compartments with coherent dynamics. 

Each cluster is then assigned a neural network branch 

parameterized by  θm, producing the  cluster -specific feature 

representation ( )

; ,m mtf θ ξ , where 1, ,m K=  . Each state 

variable  us is assigned to  exactly one cluster, denoted by  m(s). 

The prediction of  us can be obtained via the l inear combination 

of the features from its own branch  as ( ) 

> ( ) ( )

# ( )

> T

; ; , , 1, ,s sm s m s 

u t t s S= =ξ f ξ ω 



(5)

where  S denotes the number of ODE state  variables ; ωs

represents the  final  layer parameters  associated with state 

variable  s. Collecting all state -specific weights yields the final 

layer parameter s 

> 1

, , S=ω ω ω . The branch networks  

> m

f

provide cluster -specific feature representations, while the state -

dependent weights  

> s

ω map these features to the individual 

state  variables . In MI -PINN, the  final layer  parameters  ω are 

not updated by gradient descent s; instead,  they are  computed  in 

closed form via a physics -informed pseudo -inverse, as detailed 

below .

During Stage I, only the  representation  parameters  

> 1

, , K= 

  

are optimized using gradient descent, 

following the update rule ( )

# ( ) 

> P100INN

, ;  

> Niii

 

> −=

= −  θθ θ θ θ ξ



(6)

where  η is the learning rate ; N is the total number of gradient 

descent iterations ;( ) 

> i

θ

 is the closed -form solution of the 

final  layer parameters obtained from the pseudo -inverse at  the 

i-th  iteration .

In  Stage  I, the  representation  parameters  θ (i.e., the 

parameters  prior to the final layer ) are learned  across multiple 

tasks with varying parameter sets  or missing term formulations 

ξ. To improve the prediction stability,  the computation  of the 

final  layer parameters  ω is formulated as a physics -informed 

regularized least -squares problem . This formulation integrates 

both the feature outputs and the governing  system  equations, 

leading to the following optimization problem  for  ω*( )

# ( ) ( ) 

> TT

arg min 

 

> 

 = − − +     

> ξξξξθθ

θ A b A b

> 

  

(7)

where ξθA denotes the physics -informed  feature  matrix 

constructed from the learned  multi -branch  representations ( )

; ,m mtf θ ξ

;ξ

b represents  the  physics constraints  induced by 

the governing system ; λ is  the Tikhonov  regularization 

parameter . Since the optimization of the final  layer parameters 

ω can be formulated as a least -squares problem, the underlying 

physics can be embedded directly into this formulation, leading 

to the following system ( ) 

> ( ) ( )

## ( ) 

> ( ) ( )

## ( ) 

> ( ) ( )

( ) 

> ( ) ( )

( )

( )

## ( )

( )( )                               

> ODE ODE
> ODE ODE ODE 1,ODE 1ODE ODE ODE ,ODE 1IC 0IC ,IC 0IC ,
> ;,;;,;0; ,0; ,
> m s im s nm s im s nSm s im s m s im s
> fttfttufuf

=                   =                            

> ξξθAω θ b
> θξξθξξξθξξθξ
> 
>  
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 
> 



            

> 1, 2, ,pin
> =

(8)

where  fm(s), i denotes  the  i-th feature produced by the  branch 

network  corresponding to the cluster of state  variable  s; np

represents  the number of features (neurons) in the branch’s 

output layer . It can be seen from  Eq.  (8) that , once the 

representation  parameters  θ are  fixed,  the  final layer parameters 

ω can be directly solved through the physics -informed pseudo -

inverse , yielding a closed -form solution when the system is 

linear with respect t o ω as ( )

# ( ) ( ) 

> 1TT

.



> −

 = +      

> ξξξξθθθ

ω θ I A A A b

(9)

Even when the system is nonlinear, the lagged -coefficient 

method  [41]  can be applied,  in which the nonlinear terms are 

frozen using their values from the previous iteration . This 

converts the problem into a sequence of linear least -squares 

subproblems. Consequently, at each iteration, the PINN loss  in 

Eq.  (2) can be reformulated in its linearized form with respect 

to  ω as ( )

## ( )

## ( ) ( )

# ( ) ( )( ) ( )           

> IC ODE Data
> 2IC 021IC 2ODE ODE 21ODE 2Data Da PINN IC IC ODE ODE Data Data ODE Da ta Data 21Da ta ta

, ;,,,1 0; 1 ; ;1 ; ;  

> niniiiniii

unt tnt u tn

 

> ===

= + += −= −=  −

# 

θ θ ξθ ξ ξθθ

ff

ξ ξξ

f

ξ

 

 







 





(10 )

In practical applications,  MI -PINN leverages  Eq.  (10 ) to 

efficiently process prior tasks with different  configurations  ξ,

each corresponding to a distinct task instance or system setting .

By repeatedly solving the linearized system and updating the 

final layer under physics constraints , the training process 

becomes more stable and converges significantly faster . This 

iterative closed -form refinement greatly improves 

computational efficiency and predictive accuracy in  meta -

learning scenarios involving  high -dimensional  coupled  ODE 

systems .7

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

E.  Decoupled  Meta -Inverse  Modeling 

In  Stage  II , the pretrained  representation  parameters  θ*,

which encapsulate the knowledge learned from multiple tasks  ξ,

are kept fixed . The model then identifies the task -specific 

variables for a new target system by optimizing only the 

corresponding inverse variables, including physical parameters 

and neural parameters associated with missing  term discovery, 

as formulated in ( )

# ( )

# ( )

# ( ) ( )

> Inve 1r e 00TsT

, , ;, arg min   

> Niii

     

> 
> −=

= −  = − − + 

#  αα α α αθ θ

α α α α θ θα θ A b A b





  

(11 )

where  α denotes  the task -specific unknown variables to be 

identified during inverse modeling, such as physical parameters 

and neural parameters associated with missing  term discovery .

Since the pretrained  representation  parameters  θ* are kept fixed ,

the  final layer parameters  ω can still be obtained via the 

physics -informed pseudo -inverse as defined in  Eqs.  (8) and  (9),

but now with  α replacing the previously known  task -specific 

configuration s ξ. The corresponding loss function for inverse 

modeling  is formulated as ( )

# ( )

# ( ) ( )( ) ( )    

> ODE Obs
> Inverse 2ODE ODE 21ODE 2Obs Obs aObs 21ODE DOb tsa

, ,1 ; ;1;,,;  

> niiiniii

t tnt u tn



> ==

+=−  −

# 

α α θ θα θ αf

α θ f

 



 



(12 )

where  nObs  denotes  the number of observation points used for 

inverse  modeling ; uObs  represents the corresponding ground 

truth observation data . During  this  stage, gradient -based 

optimizers such as SGD or Adam are employed to update  α in 

Eq.  (12 ) using the available observation data , while  θ* remains 

fixed and  the final  layer parameters  ω are  iteratively computed 

via the physics -informed pseudo -inverse  based on the current 

estimate of  α. This meta -informed inverse modeling procedure 

enables MI -PINN to recover  unknown physical  parameters and 

model  missing terms in large -scale dynamical systems , thereby 

providing a stable and reliable framework for  the  high -

dimensional ODE system  identification. 

IV.  MI -PINN  FOR  INVERSE  PBPK  MODELING 

A.  PBPK Model 

To demonstrate the capability of MI -PINN on  a realistic 

non linear , high -dimensional,  and multi -scale  ODE  system , w e

choose to utilize  the  whole -body  PBPK  modeling  framework 

described here.  The  whole -body  PBPK model  is  used to 

describe the ADME behaviour of drugs as they enter the body 

and  consists of multiple organ compartments, each 

characterized by their own distinct volumes, blood flow and 

partition coefficients, collectively forming a comprehensive 

whole -body system. These organs include the brain, lungs, 

heart, stomach, intestine, spl een, pancreas, adipose tissue, skin, 

muscle, bones, liver, and kidney. The liver and kidney serve as 

the primary sites for systemic drug elimination, while intestinal 

and hepatic first -pass metabolism account for pre -systemic 

clearance. Arterial and venous blood compartments connect 

these organs, with drug distribution throughout the body 

determined by organ -specific blood flow rates and tissue 

partition coefficients. Tissue -to -plasma partition coefficients 

are  calculated using the method described by  [42] , which 

governs the extent of drug partitioning across different tissues. 

The overall model structure is illustrated in  Fig.  2.

Fig.  2 A schematic of a classical PBPK model. 

The transfer of drugs between all compartments follows a 

perfusion -limited distribution which assumes the rate -

determining steps of drug distribution to be governed by tissue 

blood flow rather than permeability factors. This assumption is 

commonly used and  valid when working with drugs with high 

permeability. Thus, the rate of change of drug in each organ 

compartment can be described by the following mass balance 

equation ( )  

> ArterialBl nOrgan Organ Organ Organ Or ood ga
> b

Q C C R Kp dC dt V

−=

(13 )

where  COrgan  denotes the  drug concentration in the organ 

compartment ; QOrgan  is the  organ blood flow  rate ; CArterialBlood  is 

the  drug concentration in the arterial blood compartment ; Rb

represents  the  blood -to -plasma ratio of the drug ; Kp Organ  denotes 

the  tissue -to -plasma partition coefficient of the drug ; VOrgan  is 

the  organ volume. The equation for lungs is identical  but  with 

the substitution of  CArterialBlood  with  venous blood  drug 

concentration  CVenousBlood  due to reverse flow directionality 

from the venous blood to the lungs and back to arterial blood. 

The gut compartments become relevant for oral 

administration by accounting for drug dissolution and other 

absorption -related processes. The absorption rate of drugs from 

the intestinal lumen to intracellular can be defined by the 

absorption rate constant  ka using the following equation eff, man 2

> a

Pk R

=

(14 )

where  Peff,  man  represents the effective permeability in man and 

is computed from  in vitro  apparent permeability values using 

the relationships established by  [43] , and  R represents  the  radius 

of the intestine. 8

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

Drugs that are absorbed in the intestinal tract are subjected to 

first -pass effect when  they  enter the liver via the portal vein 

before being distributed to the rest of the body by blood flows. 

Drug clearance in the liver can involve multiple CYP, UGT and 

SULT enzymes depending on the drug and can be described 

using the following equation ( )               

> Liver Liver Liver Liver max, Liver ,Liver Liver Arteri l 1,, mic Liver ,a Blood bNiu b im i uu b

dC Q C C R Kp dt V C f MPPGL W VK f C f=

= −    −  +  

# 

(15 )

where  Vmax ,i  denotes  the maximal reaction rate for the  i-th 

enzyme in drug metabolism ; fu,b  is  the unbound fraction of the 

drug ; MPPGL  represents  the  microsomal protein per gram of 

liver (replaced with  CPPGL  representing cytosolic protein per 

gram of liver for SULT enzymes) ; WLiver  is the  liver weight ; Km,i 

is  the drug concentration which provides half of its maximal 

reaction rate for the  i-th enzyme. The  in vitro V max  is scaled to 

whole liver level using  in vitro -to -in vivo  extrapolation ( IVIVE )

with the  MPPGL  and  WLiver  terms. 

Drugs can also be renally cleared and  are  assumed to follow 

a simple linear elimination kinetics in the kidney compartment, 

defined by the following equation ( )    

> ArterialBloo yKidney Kidney Kidney Kidney Kidne dbR

Q C C R Kp CL dC dt V

− −=

(16 )

where  CL R represents the renal clearance of the drug. 

B.  Inverse  PBPK  Modeling  Formulation 

Based on the general dynamical system formulation 

introduced in Section III .A,  the  whole -body PBPK system 

described in Section IV .A can be viewed as a  specific instance 

of a parameterized dynamical system . Hence, the  PBPK model 

is a representative  high -dimensional system of coupled 

nonlinear ODEs, where the state variables correspond to drug 

or metabolite concentrations across multiple physiological 

compartments.  In this context, the state variable ( )

;u t ξ in Eq. 

(1) correspond s to drug or metabolite concentrations across 

physiological compartments , while the task -specific parameters 

ξ denote the input configuration s that define  PBPK task s, where 

different configurations correspond to variations in key kinetic 

parameters  or different formulations of missing mechanistic 

terms , thereby inducing a family of related PBPK systems. 

During  Stage I , MI -PINN is trained across this family of 

PBPK tasks induced by varying configurations  ξ. Through this 

process, the model learns  the  representation  parameters  θ* that 

capture common dynamical structures across  multi -scale  PBPK 

systems. 

For a new target PBPK system, the inverse problem aims to 

infer unknown system components from sparse and noisy 

clinical observations.  In this work, we consider two types of 

inverse tasks based on the same observed concentration -time 

data: parameter inference, where unknown kinetic parameters 

are estimated, and missing term discovery, where unknown 

mechanistic components in the governing equations are 

reconstructed. 

In  Stage II , the pretrained representation  θ* is fixed during 

inverse modeling, and only the task -specific variables  α in Eq. 

(11 ) are optimized.  In the context of PBPK modeling , α may 

correspond to unknown physiological or kinetic parameters, or 

to the parameters of auxiliary neural networks introduced to 

approximate missing mechanisms across compartments  as 

illustrated in  Fig.  3. Meanwhile, the final  layer parameters  ω

are computed via the physics -informed pseudo -inverse  in Eqs. 

(8) and  (9) based on the current estimate of  α. This two -stage 

formulation effectively decouples representation learning  and 

inverse  modeling  and reduces the complexity of the 

optimization problem , thereby providing  a unified  framework 

of parameter inference and missing term discovery in PBPK 

systems. Missing term discovery      

> Optimize
> neural
> network
> parameters
> Approximate
> missing
> mechanisms
> Parameter inference
> Optimize kinetic parameters
> (e.g., Kmand Vmax )
> Clinical observations
> PBPK model
> Inverse
> modeling
> Model fit to clinical data
> Optimize α

Fig.  3 Illustration of parameter inference and missing term discovery in PBPK modeling .

V.  EXPERIMENTAL  STUDY 

The  MI -PINN  framework  is  extensively tested with multiple 

scenarios. To establish a working proof -of -concept and assess 

its performance in parameter inference and missing  mecha nism 

discovery, paracetamol  is  used as a case -study. Paracetamol  is 

chosen  as a first demonstration  because of its well -

characterized PK and well -described clearance pathways. The 

drug parameters for the paracetamol PBPK model  are  reported 

in Supplementary Table S1. The paracetamol model  is  tested 

under two different dosing administration routes:  the  IV  dosing 

case (22 ODE -system) and oral case (33 ODE -system).  A

second model using theophylline as a case -study  is constructed 

to assess the robustness of the core MI -PINN framework in 

providing accurate parameter inference when  applied to  a

different drug with different parameter sets. While the 

paracetamol model  is  tested and validated using aggregate data, 

in the case of theophylline, multiple individual clinical data  is 

used to assess the model’s ability to handle noisy data arising 

from inter -individual variability. The theophylline model drug 

parameters  are  reported in Supplementary Table S2. The full  set 

of  ODE s for the IV and oral scenarios  are  reported in 

Supplementary Table s S3 and S4 , respectively, while  lists of 

compartment and system parameters used in the  modeling  are 9

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

reported in Supplementary Table s S5 and S6 , respectively.  The 

summary of  ODE  structure and coupling in  PBPK  models  is 

shown in  TABLE  II .

For the IV  and oral  dosing case, the number of clusters is 

determined  to  be  two  and  three  respectively . Each branch 

network adopts a two -layer architecture with 256 neurons per 

layer and sine activation functions, denoted as  1-256(sin) -

256(sin).  The outputs of all branch networks are concatenated 

and mapped to the final state variables through a final layer, 

whose parameters are computed via the proposed physics -

informed pseudo -inverse . All experiments are trained using the 

Adam optimizer with an initial learning rate of 0.05. The 

number of temporal input points is set to 200. For missing term 

discovery, an auxiliary neural network with architecture  1-

3(swish) -1(linear)  is employed to approximate the unknown 

mechanistic components .                  

> TABLE II
> SUMMARY OF ODE STRUCTURE AND COUPLING IN PBPK MODELS
> Model Number
> of ODEs
> ODE coupling
> structure
> IV paracetamol PBPK 22 20 linear, 2 nonlinear
> Oral paracetamol PBPK 33 21linear, 12 nonlinear
> IV theophylline PBPK 22 20 linear, 2 nonlinear

A.  IV  Paracetamol PBPK Model for Parameter Inference 

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed MI -PINN, we 

first consider an  IV  paracetamol  dosing case described by a 

PBPK system consisting of 22 ODEs, including 20 linear and 2 

nonlinear equations  (Supplementary Table S3) . The system can 

be generally written as ( ) ( ) 

# ( )

( )

> 0

, , , 0t t t= =x f x p x x

(17 )

where  x(t) denotes the vector of state variables  (i.e.,  drug 

concentrations across compartments ); p denotes the PBPK 

model parameters ; f(⋅) defines the underlying PBPK dynamics ;

x0 represents  the initial condition s.

In this  modeling  exercise, we intentionally mask the 

parameter value for the  Vmax  and  Km of UDP -

glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 2B15 enzyme metabolism of 

paracetamol to evaluate if MI -PINN can predict the correct 

values. UGT2B15 enzyme kinetics  is chosen to be masked as 

glucuronidation by UGTs accounts for majority of 

paracetamol’s metabolic pathway, with the 2B15 isoform 

possessing the highest  in vitro  clearance value amongst the 

UGTs  [44] . The PK profile for paracetamol is therefore 

expected to be sensitive to UGT2B15 kinetics making them a 

suitable candidate for testing parameter inference.  The 

observed output data used for the fitting exercise  is the 

aggregated venous blood concentration -time profile (consisting 

of 10 clinical observation points) for paracetamol after a two -

hour 20 mg/kg infusion dose from a clinic al study  [45] .

As a baseline,  the whole -body PBPK model  is  separately 

constructed in  MATLAB® version R2023b (23.2.0.2380103) 

(MathWorks, Natick, USA) using the SimBiology® module 

(version 23.2) . We  then  perform parameter inference 

simultaneously for  Vmax  and  Km of UGT2B15 metabolism 

kinetics  (denoted as  Km, P and  Vmax , P for  paracetamol ) using 

MA TLAB’s  lsqcurvefit  function which employs a trust region 

reflective algorithm. The algorithm iteratively fits model 

parameters by locally approximating the  objective function 

within a dynamically adjusted trust region and enforcing 

parameter bounds via reflection,  thereby  allowing convergence 

for  such  constrained nonlinear least -squares problems  [46] .

Parameter inference  is  separately  performed  with MI -PINN .

In  Stage I , MI -PINN is trained according to  Eq.  (10 ) to  learn the 

representation  parameters  θ* via meta -learning over 20 tasks 

with different parameter configurations of  the two enzyme 

kinetic parameters  Km, P and  Vmax , P (i.e.,  ξ in Eq.  (10 )). In Stage 

II , the pretrained  representation  θ* is kept fixed , and the kinetic 

parameters  Km, P and  Vmax , P (i.e.,  α in Eq.  (11 )) are  inferred  by 

solving  Eqs.  (11 ) and  (12 ) using the  same  clinical  data  [45] 

used with MATLAB’s  trust region reflective algorithm . The 

prediction results for all 22  state  variables  obtained via 

parameter inference  are presented in  Fig.  4, while  the 

corresponding  physiological interpretations  of  State 1 -State 22 

are provided  in  TABLE  III . The inferred parameters obtained 

by MI -PINN  and  the  MATLAB  trust region reflective 

algorithm  are summarized in  TABLE  IV .     

> Fig. 4Prediction results of all 22 state variables obtained via
> parameter inference for the IV paracetamol PBPK model .

It can be seen from  Fig.  4 that  the predictions produced by 

the proposed MI -PINN exhibit excellent agreement with the 

reference results . The  mean squared error (MSE)  across all 22 

state variables is only 0.96 , demonstrating the strong predictive 

capability of the model . As summarized  in  TABLE  IV , while 

the ratio  of  Vmax , P to  Km, P (the ratio represents the catalytic 

efficiency of UGT2B15)  inferred by  both the trust region 

reflective algorithm and  MI -PINN  are  similar to the actual 

values, both  Vmax , P and  Km, P predictions  are  significantly more 10 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

accurate with MI -PINN versus the MATLAB algorithm,  even 

when trained  using  a single  aggregated  venous blood 

concentration -time profile . Th ese  result s indicate that MI -PINN 

can reliably recover key kinetic parameters under sparse 

clinical data .

TABLE  III 

DEFINITIONS OF  STATE  VARIABLES  FOR  STATE  1-STATE  22 

State  Description  State  Description 

State 1  Arterial  blood 

(drug)  State 1 2 Rest  of body  (drug) 

State 2  Venous  blood 

(drug)  State  13  Kidney  (drug) 

State 3  Brain  (drug)  State  14  Portal  vein  (drug) 

State  4 Lung  (drug)  State  15  Stomach  (drug) 

State  5 Heart  (drug)  State  16  Duodenum  wall 

(drug) 

State  6 Spleen  (drug)  State  17  Jejunum  wall  (drug) 

State  7 Pancreas 

(drug)  State  18  Ileum  wall  (drug) 

State  8 Adipose  (drug)  State  19  Large  intestine  wall 

(drug) 

State  9 Skin  (drug)  State  20  Liver  (drug) 

State  10  Muscle  (drug)  State  21  Liver  (metabolite )

State  11  Bone  (drug)  State  22  Urine  (excreted 

drug) 

TABLE  IV 

INFERRED  KINETIC  PARAMETERS  FOR  THE  IV  PARACETAMOL  PBPK 

MODEL 

Model  Km, P

(μmol/L )

Vmax , P

(μmol/(h· mg) )

Ratio of  Vmax , P

to  Km, P

Ground 

truth  [45]  23000  1.80  7.83  × 10 -5

Trust region 

reflective 

algorithm 

100,000  8.86  8.86 × 10 -5

MI -PINN  27,727  2.18  7.86  × 10 -5

B.  Oral  Paracetamol PBPK Model for Parameter Inference 

To further validate the  practical scalability  of MI -PINN,  we 

consider an oral dosing case  involving  the ingestion of a 1000 

mg paracetamol tablet  [45]  using  a more complex PBPK system 

with 33 ODEs , comprising  21 linear and 12 nonlinear 

equations , from the addition of gut compartments and 

absorption processes (Supplementary Table S4) . The system 

can be written in the same general form as  Eq.  (17 ).

MI -PINN is applied to  the  oral dosing case under the same 

two -stage training and inverse inference setting s as described in 

Section  V.A.  Specifically, the representation  parameters  θ* are 

learned via meta -training on the  same 20 parameter sets  of  Km, 

> P

and  Vmax , P, while  all inverse inference settings, including the 

clinical observation data and the kinetic parameters to be 

inferred, remain unchanged.  The prediction results for all 33 

state variables  obtained via parameter inference  are presented 

in  Fig.  5, while  the physiological interpretations of State 1 -State 

33 are summarized in  TABLE  V. T he inferred parameters 

obtained by MI -PINN  and MATLAB  are  shown  in  TABLE  VI .

As shown in  Fig.  5, even for the more complex  oral 

paracetamol PBPK model  consisting of 33 ODEs  (12 

nonlinear) , the proposed MI -PINN achieves highly accurate 

predictions . Furthermore, as summarized in  TABLE  VI , the 

ratio  between  Vmax , P and  Km, P inferred by MI -PINN remains 

close to the ground truth . In contrast, the  MATLAB -based trust -

region reflective  algorithm  exhibits degraded parameter 

consistency in the higher -dimensional PBPK system, 

demonstrating the robustness and effectivenes s of the proposed 

approach for inverse parameter inference  despite  increased 

model complexity .

Fig.  5 Prediction results of  all  33  state variables obtained via 

parameter inference for the  oral  paracetamol PBPK model .

TABLE  V

DEFINITIONS  OF  STATE  VARIABLES  FOR  STATE  1-STATE  33 

State  Description  State  Description 

State 1  Arterial  blood 

(drug)  State 1 8 Jejunum  lumen  (solid 

drug )

State 2  Venous  blood 

(drug)  State  19 Ileum  lumen 

(dissolved  drug )

State 3  Brain  (drug)  State  20  Ileum  lumen  (solid 

drug )

State  4 Lung  (drug)  State  21 

Large  intestine 

lumen  (dissolved 

drug )

State  5 Heart  (drug)  State  22  Large  intestine 

lumen  (solid  drug )

State  6 Duodenum  lumen 

(dissolved  drug ) State  23  Stomach  (drug) 

State  7 Duodenum  lumen 

(solid  drug ) State  24  Stomach  fluid 

(dissolved  drug )

State  8 Spleen  (drug)  State  25  Stomach  fluid  (solid 

drug )

State  9 Pancreas  (drug)  State  26 Duodenum  wall 

(drug) 

State  10  Adipose  (drug)  State  27 Jejunum  wall  (drug) 

State  11  Skin  (drug)  State  28 Ileum  wall  (drug) 

State  12  Muscle  (drug)  State 2 9 Large  intestine  wall 

(drug) 

State  13  Bone  (drug)  State  30  Feces (excreted drug) 

State  14  Rest  of body 

(drug) 

State  31  Liver  (drug) 

State  15  Kidney  (drug)  State  32  Liver  (m etabolite )

State  16  Portal  vein  (drug)  State  33  Urine  (excreted 

drug) 

State  17 Jejunum  lumen 

(dissolved  drug ) - -11 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

TABLE  VI 

INFERRED  KINETIC  PARAMETERS  FOR  THE  ORAL  PARACETAMOL  PBPK 

MODEL 

Model  Km, P

(μmol/L )

Vmax , P

(μmol/(h· mg) )

Ratio of  Vmax , P to 

Km, P

Ground truth 

[45]  23 ,000  1.80  7.83 × 10 -5

Trust region 

reflective 

algorithm 

16,310  3.74  2.29 × 10 -4

MI -PINN  18 ,053  1.32  7.31 × 10 -5

C.  IV  Paracetamol PBPK Model  for  Neural -Symbolic 

Discover y of  Unknown Mechanisms 

To further demonstrate the versatility of MI -PINN,  we 

consider  the potential for  missing  mechanism  discovery based 

on the same  IV  paracetamol PBPK system . In contrast to the 

parameter inference setting  in Section  V.A,  we intentionally 

mask the entire UGT2B15 Michaelis -Menten  equation 

including the  IVIVE  terms in  the ODEs corresponding to 

concentration of paracetamol and its metabolite in the liver , and 

evaluate  MI -PINN ’s ability  to  handle such under -specified 

systems . Specifically , t he entire UGT2B15  metabolic equation ,

as  formulated  in  Eq.  (18 ), is  now treated as unknown ( )      

> , mic Liver ,Live max, rLiver ,Liver Li ,ev r

( )./ //     

> uu b uPWbbmP

f C f MPP V GL W C f R V Kp K M +      

(18 )

where  fu, mic  denotes  the  fraction unbound of paracetamol in the 

microsomes (included to improve  IVIVE  of clearance) ; CLiver 

represents  the  paracetamol concentration in the liver ; fu, b is the 

fraction unbound in blood ; MW denotes the  molecular weight of 

paracetamol ; Rb represents  the  blood -to -plasma  ratio ; Kp Liver  is 

the  tissue partition coefficient between liver and plasma ; VLiver 

denotes the  liver volume. 

During meta -training, 20 different  candidate  formulations of 

the missing term  (i.e., ξ in Eq.  (10 )) are used to learn the 

optimized  representation  parameters  θ* via  Eq.  (10 ). With the 

pretrained representation  θ* fixed , the  unknown term  is 

approximated  by a neural network  whose parameters  (i.e.,  α in 

Eq.  (11 )) are optimized using  the same clinical data as in 

Section  V.A  by solving  Eqs.  (11 ) and  (12 ). The prediction 

results for all 22 state variables  obtained  through this approach 

are presented in  Fig.  6. The physiological interpretations of 

State 1-State 22 follow the same definitions as those 

summarize d in  TABLE  III . The  approximated mech anistic 

term’s  trajectory over time is illustrated i n Fig.  7.

As shown in  Fig.  6, even in the presence of  a missing term, 

the proposed MI -PINN achieves highly accurate predictions 

across all 22 state variables, with an overall MSE of 

approximately 4.73. This demonstrates that the learned feature 

representations and physics -informed pseudo -inverse 

formulation en able MI -PINN to maintain predictive stability 

and generalization, even under incomplete  mechanistic 

knowledge . Furthermore, as illustrated in  Fig.  7, the 

reconstructed missing  mechanistic  term closely matches the 

ground -truth, confirming MI -PINN’s capability to identify 

hidden physical relationships and  approximate  unknown 

governing dynamics directly from limited and noisy 

observational data. These results highlight the potential of MI -

PINN as a powerful framework for scientific discovery in 

complex biophysical systems. 

Fig.  6 Prediction results of  all  22  state variables obtained via  missing 

term  discovery  for the  IV  paracetamol PBPK model .

Fig.  7 Prediction  of the missing  mechanistic term as approximated 

by the neural network .

With  the  learned relationship, it is  further  possible to 

leverage  domain knowledge to guide an algorithmic search 

towards uncovering the  explicit  functional form of  the  missing 

term . We consider  the real -world  scenario where the  domain 

knowledge experts  are cognizant of the individual terms that 

make up the masked function but are unaware of how to 

assemble the terms together. Firstly, we utilize the following 

grouping of terms based on the ir  physical  interpretation rmax, 0 Live PX CV= 

(19 )1 WX M=

(20 )2 , Liver u b X f C= 

(21 )12 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 3 , mic ,m P uX K f= 

(22 )4 Liver X MPPGL W= 

(23 )5 , Liver u b bX f R Kp = 

(24 )6 Liver 1X V=

(25 )

Based on domain knowledge in binding kinetics , PBPK 

modeling , and  IVIVE , we understand that  Vmax , P and  CLiver 

should always be multiplied together ( Eq.  (19 )).  Similarly,  only 

the unbound portion of the drug  is  subject to metabolism ( Eq. 

(21 )).  fu, mic  is a lso  a term that is only relevant to  Km, P (Eq.  (22 )). 

Eq.  (23 ) is the classical method for performing  IVIVE  to  scal e

clearance  for real systems while  Eq.  (24 ) is a well -known 

equation for  modeling  drug distribution and 

tissue/blood/plasma partitioning in PBPK models. Lastly,  the 

ODEs  as constructed  are  represented as amount over time 

instead of concentration over time, hence the division by  VLiver 

(Eq.  (25 )) is required for dimensional consistency .

Subsequently , we can use Buckingham Pi Theorem  [47]  to 

reduce the following expression for ( )      

> 0123456

, , , , , ,Y f X X X X X X X=

into the following 

expression, ( ) 

> 12

,y

 =   , through dimensional analysis. 30 5 4 6

> y

XYX X X X 

 =

(26 )1 314 6

X X X X 

 = 

(27 )224 6

XX X 

 =

(28 )

By applying symbolic regression to the outputs of the MI -PINN 

model , we obtain the following ( ) 

> 12

, 1y

 =   =

(29 )04 5 63

XY X X X X

=

(30 )

where the model  is  able to correctly deduce the functional form 

of the missing term ( Eq.  (30 )),  absent  X2/X1 that is present  in the 

denominator  of  the ground truth  expression  (Eq.  (18 )). This is 

perfectly reasonable since  CLiver  <<  Km, P during the entire 

simulation process in the IV dosing scenario, which means that 

Km, P dominates the denominator and the Michaelis -Menten 

kinetics is linear and approximate ly equal  to max, Liver , , mic  

> Pm P u

V CK f

 .

Hence,  the  learned auxiliary network did not model the impact 

of  X2/X1 since its overall impact on the ODE  system  is minimal 

and this is carried through  into  the derived expression in  Eq. 

(30 ).

The findings from our missing  term  discovery work illustrate 

a unique implementation  and promise  of AI.  For example, 

recent works on the use of AI for  ODE system (e.g.  PK )

modeling  are largely focused on building better QSAR models 

for ADME parameter predictions  [48, 49] . While accurate 

estimation of ADME parameters is essential for modeling, an 

equally important  yet often neglected  problem  lies in  crafting 

appropriate  mathematical  equations or functions  to represent 

the entire system dynamics . In practice, model complexity is 

constrained by the extent of existing mechanistic knowledge, 

making performance improvements difficult when underlying 

mechanisms are poorly  described . Model development 

frequently relies on  making  assumptions or heuristic choices to 

approximate unknown processes.  In this context, the ability of 

MI -PINN to  approximate  missing o r unknown  mechanisms 

through  learnable  dynamic terms  and downstream integration 

with dimensional analysis and symbolic regression  highlights 

its potential to address this long -standing limitation  not only in 

PBPK modeling , but in the field  of system identification in 

ODE systems across different scien tific domains .

D.  IV  Theophylline  PBPK Model for Parameter Inference 

To further  test the robustness and  evaluate the  predictive 

performance  of  the  MI -PINN  framework for data from different 

individuals with  realistic biological variation , we consider an 

IV  theophylline PBPK model as an additional  study . The model 

consists of  the same  22 -ODE  system  but  with a different set of 

parameter values  based on the ADME of theophylline 

(Supplementary Table S3) .      

> Fig. 8Prediction results of all 22 state variables obtained via
> parameter inference for the IV theophylline PBPK model .

Similar to paracetamol, theophylline has relatively 

straightforward PK and is predominantly metabolized by 

CYP1A2 and CYP2E1 to form 3 -methylxanthine (3 -MX), 1 -

MX and 1,  3-dimethyluric acid (DMU)  [50] . Given literature 

reports that metabolism by CYP1A2 to DMU is the major 

pathway for theophylline metabolism with the highest clearance 

kinetics amongst the various CYP isoforms  [50, 51] , we again 

mask  Vmax  and  Km for theophylline metabolism by CYP1A2 to 13 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

DMU,  denoted  as  Vmax , T and  Km, T, respectively .

Following the same training paradigm as in Section  V.A , MI -

PINN  is first meta -trained  across  varying configurations of 

Vmax , T and  Km, T. After  Stage I , the learned representation  θ* is 

kept fixed , and target kinetic parameters are inferred from 

sparse clinical observations in the second stage.  In this study ,

eight  individual  venous blood concentration -time profile s, each 

with a different dosing amount of theophylline ranging from 

194 mg to 383 mg infused IV over the same 40 min duration 

[52] , are  used  for parameter inference , representing inter -

subject noise/variability in clinical measurements . In particular, 

it is worth highlighting that the integration of a mechanistic 

model in MI -PINN allows for immense flexibility in unifying 

measurements across disparate experiments (i.e. different 

subjects each with their own dosing regimens).  The prediction 

results for all 22  state  variables  obtained via parameter 

inference  are presented in  Fig.  8, and  the physiological 

interpretations of State 1 -State 22 follow the same definitions 

as those summarized in  TABLE  III . T he corresponding inferred 

parameters obtained by MI -PINN  and  the  MATLAB  trust 

region reflective algorithm  are summarized in  TABLE  VII .                       

> TABLE VII
> INFERRED KINETIC PARAMETERS FOR THE IV THEOPHYLLINE PBPK
> MODEL
> Model Km,T
> (μmol/L )
> Vmax ,T
> (μmol/(h· pmol) )
> Ratio of Vmax ,T
> to Km,T
> Ground truth
> [52] 230 4.39× 10 -41.91× 10 -6
> Trust region
> reflective
> algorithm
> 999 1.92 ×10 -31.92× 10 -6
> MI -PINN 214 4. 10 ×10 -41.92× 10 -6

As shown in  Fig.  8, MI -PINN achieves  an  MSE of 

approximately 0.17 across all 22 state variables, indicating 

accurate prediction performance for the previously unseen 

theophylline PBPK system . Moreover,  similar to the previous 

two parameter inference  results for  oral and IV paracetamol, 

MI -PINN  is  able to achieve a much more accurate prediction of 

Vmax , T and  Km, T compared to the trust region reflective 

algorithm employed by MATLAB  as reported in  TABLE  VII ,

despite both having similar  Vmax , T/Km, T ratio as the ground truth .

Consolidating the results seen from  TABLE  IV , TABLE  VI ,

and  TABLE  VII , we observe that our MI -PINN consistently 

provides more accurate prediction of both  Vmax , T and  Km, T

compared to the trust region reflective algorithm. While both 

algorithms  are  able to fit the respective observed clinical 

datasets as both  are  able to provide accurate predictions for the 

ratio (catalytic efficiency), accurate prediction s for the 

individual  Vmax , T and  Km, T values  are also  important 

mechanistically . Under high dosing conditions and/or  when 

combined with high permeability drugs, hepatic CYP enzymes 

may become saturated and metabolism becomes  nonlinear  once 

drug concentration exceeds  Km, T. Under such circumstances, 

inaccurate predictions for  Km, T may significantly affect the  final 

predicted metabolism kinetics. Likewise, similar issues can 

arise when predicting transporters’ kinetics. Under these 

conditions, MI -PINN  is  significantly more valuable for 

parameter inference.  Notably , MI -PINN  more  accurately  infer s

both  Vmax , T and  Km, T values  across  all three parameter inference 

scenarios despite an infinite number of possible combinations 

of  Vmax , T and  Km, T values that can provide the same catalytic 

efficiency  due to its better learned representation .

E.  Ablation  Analysis 

(1)  Inference Time 

For conventional inverse  design approaches, numerical ODE 

solvers are typically invoked repeatedly during gradient -based 

optimization, which leads to  considerable  computational 

overhead. To quantify the efficiency of MI -PINN, we use the 

22 -ODE  IV  theophylline PBPK model as an example and 

compare the wall -clock time of a single forward run using the 

SciPy odeint solver with that of MI -PINN, as reported  in 

TABLE  VIII .              

> TABLE VIII
> WALL -CLOCK INFERENCE TIME PER RUN ON THE THEOPHYLLINE PBPK
> MODEL
> Model SciPy MI -PINN
> Inference time /s 14.66 4. 17

As shown in  TABLE  VIII , MI -PINN requires only 4.17s for 

one prediction, compared with 14.66s using  SciPy odeint 

solver , corresponding to a 3.5 × speedup. These results 

demonstrate the computational  efficiency  of MI -PINN for 

large -scale  inverse PBPK modeling. 

(2) Representation Learning  Performance 

To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed multi -branch 

representation learning  scheme , we compare it with a single -

branch baseline that does not perform clustering based on 

dynamical similarity. For each setting, we conduct three 

independent runs with different random initializations. 

Experiments are carried out on the 22 -ODE  IV  theophylline 

PBPK model under the forward  design setting, and the 

prediction performance is summarized in  TABLE  IX .             

> TABLE IX
> PREDICTION RESULTS FOR DIFFERENT LEARNING STRATEGIES ON THE
> THEOPHYLLINE PBPK MODEL
> Learning strategy Single -branch learning Multi -branch
> learning
> MSE 5.63± 7.18 0.28± 0.25

It can be seen from  TABLE  IX  that  the proposed adaptive 

clustering -based multi -branch representation  reduces the MSE 

by approximately 95%, corresponding to about a 20× 

improvement compared with  the  single -branch model. This 

highlights  that grouping states with similar dynamics and 

learning them with dedicated branches can improve 

representation capacity and modeling accuracy in large 

heterogeneous  PBPK systems. In contrast, a single shared 

network tends to  poorly capture  the  multi -scale  behaviors 

across different compartments, leading to degraded 

performance. Overall, these results validate the advantage of 

the proposed multi -branch representation for PBPK modeling. 

(3)  Inverse  Modeling  Performance 

To assess the inverse modeling capability of the proposed 

method, we compare MI -PINN with a conventional PINN 

baseline. In the conventional PINN, the network weights and 

the masked physiological parameters are jointly optimized via 14 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

gradient descent, i.e., parameter inference is coupled with state 

approximation during training. We consider the 22 -ODE  IV 

theophylline PBPK model and infer the key metabolic 

parameters  Km, T and  Vmax , T in the inverse design setting . For a 

fair comparison, the baseline PINN adopts the same network 

architecture and training configuration as MI -PINN described 

in Section V.D. The quantitative results are summarized  in 

TABLE  X.

TABLE  X

INVERSE  MODELING  RESULTS  FOR  THE  IV  THEOPHYLLINE  PBPK 

MODEL 

Model  Km, T

(μmol/L )

Vmax , T

(μmol/(h· pmol) )

Ratio of 

Vmax , T to 

Km, T

MSE 

Ground truth 

[52]  230  4.39× 10 -4 1.91 ×10 -6 -

Conventional 

PINN  866  1.12 ×10 -4 1.29 ×10 -7 1.92 ×

10 3

MI -PINN  214  4. 10 ×10 -4 1.92 ×10 -6 0.17 

As shown in  TABLE  X, the conventional PINN exhibits a 

large estimation error in both state prediction and parameter 

identification, leading to a high MSE and highly biased inferred 

parameters. This suggests that directly coupling the 

optimization of network weights and PBPK pa rameters can 

result in a poorly conditioned learning problem in  high -

dimensional  PBPK systems, where  multi -scale  dynamics and 

limited observability make the inverse task particularly 

challenging. In contrast, MI -PINN achieves accurate  prediction 

of all 22 state trajectories  with  a substantially lower MSE  and 

recovers  Km, T and  Vmax , T values that are  close to the ground  truth 

in literature . These results demonstrate that the proposed MI -

PINN provides a more reliable and scalable solution for inverse 

PBPK modeling. 

VI.  CONCLUSION 

In this work, we propose MI -PINN, a scalable meta -inverse 

physics -informed learning framework designed to tackle 

inverse problems  in high -dimensional ODE systems  under 

partial observability and  sparse  data . Using large -scale PBPK 

modeling as a demanding  exemplar, we demonstrate the 

framework’s capability for  both parameter inference and 

missing  term discovery. The  developed  two -stage  learning 

strategy  first learns a physics -aware representation from 

multiple PBPK tasks, and then performs task -level inverse 

identification under sparse clinical observations.  To address the 

multi -scale dynamics  across  ODE state variables , we introduce 

an adaptive clustering -based multi -branch representation that 

clusters compar tments with similar dynamics and enhances the 

model’s representational capacity for  multi -scale  dynamics . In 

addition, a physics -informed pseudo -inverse formulation  is 

incorporated to compute the final convex layer in closed form, 

enabling more reliable inference under noisy observations. 

Experiments on  whole -body  paracetamol and theophylline 

PBPK systems under both  IV  and oral dosing  (22 ODEs and 33 

ODEs)  demonstrate that MI -PINN can accurately recover 

masked kinetic parameters and reconstruct missing gove rning 

terms,  while producing more reliable parameter estimates than 

solver -based  optimization and  standard  inverse PINN  baselines 

in challenging  high -dimensional  inverse settings . In f uture 

work , MI -PINN  can be extended  with uncertainty 

quantification to provide calibrated confidence intervals for 

inferred  parameters  and discovered missing terms. 

REFERENCES 

[1]  L. Lu, R. Pestourie , W. Yao, Z. Wang, F. Verdugo, and S. G. Johnson, 

“Physics -informed neural networks with hard constraints for inverse 

design, ” SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 

B1105 -B1132, 2021. 

[2]  T. Kapoor, H. Wang, A. Nú nez, and R. Dollevoet,  “Physics -informed 

neural networks for solving forward and inverse problems in complex 

beam systems, ” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning 

Systems , vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 5981 -5995, 2024. 

[3]  G. E. Karniadakis, I. G. Kevrekidis, L. Lu, P. Perdikaris, S. Wang, and 

L. Yang,  “Physics -informed machine learning, ” Nature Reviews Physics ,

vol. 3, no. 6, pp. 422 -440, 2021. 

[4]  S. Huang, W. Feng, C. Tang, Z. He, C. Yu, and J. Lv,  “Partial differential 

equations meet deep neural networks: A survey, ” IEEE Transactions on 

Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 36, no. 8, pp. 13649 -13669, 

2025. 

[5]  M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. E. Karniadakis,  “Physics -informed 

neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and 

inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations, ”

Journal of Computational Physics , vol. 378, pp. 686 -707, 2019. 

[6]  Z. Wei, J. C. Wong, N. W. Y. Sung, A. Gupta, C. C. Ooi, P. -H. Chiu, M. 

H. Dao, and Y. -S. Ong,  “How to select physics -informed neural 

networks in the absence of ground truth: A Pareto front -based strategy, ”

in  1st Workshop on the Synergy of Scientific and Machine Learning 

Modeling@ ICML2023 , 2023. 

[7]  J. C. Wong, C. C. Ooi, A. Gupta, P. -H. Chiu, J. S. Z. Low, M. H. Dao, 

and Y. -S. Ong,  “Evolutionary optimization of physics -informed neural 

networks: Advancing generalizability by the Baldwin effect, ” IEEE 

Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , pp. 1 -1, 2026. 

[8]  Z. Wei, C. C. Ooi, J. C. Wong, A. Gupta, P. -H. Chiu, and Y. -S. Ong, 

“Out -of -distribution generalization for neural physics solvers, ” arXiv 

preprint arXiv:.19091 , 2026. 

[9]  H. Gao, M. J. Zahr, and J. X. Wang,  “Physics -informed graph neural 

Galerkin networks: A unified framework for solving PDE -governed 

forward and inverse problems, ” Computer Methods in Applied 

Mechanics and Engineering , vol. 390, p. 114502, 2022. 

[10]  A. D. Jagtap, Z. Mao, N. Adams, and G. E. Karniadakis,  “Physics -

informed neural networks for inverse problems in supersonic flows, ”

Journal of Computational Physics , vol. 466, p. 111402, 2022. 

[11]  N. Krä mer, N. Bosch, J. Schmidt, and P. Hennig,  “Probabilistic ODE 

solutions in millions of dimensions, ” in  Proceedings of the 39th 

International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) , 2022. 

[12]  M. Penwarden, S. Zhe, A. Narayan, and R. M. Kirby,  “A metalearning 

approach for physics -informed neural networks (PINNs): Application to 

parameterized PDEs, ” Journal of Computational Physics , vol. 477, p. 

111912, 2023. 

[13]  A. Vettoruzzo, M. R. Bouguelia, J. Vanschoren, T. Rö gnvaldsson, and 

K. Santosh,  “Advances and challenges in meta -learning: A technical 

review, ” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine 

Intelligence , vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 4763 -4779, 2024. 

[14]  A. M. Talkington, Y. Cao, A. J. Kearsley, and S. K. Lai,  “Opportunities 

for machine learning and artificial intelligence in physiologically -based 

pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modeling, ” Advanced Drug Delivery Reviews ,

vol. 227, p. 115716, 2025. 

[15]  T. Kennedy,  “Managing the drug discovery/development interface, ”

Drug  Discovery  Today , vol. 2, no. 10, pp. 436 -444, 1997. 

[16]  J. Wang and L. Urban,  “The impact of early ADME profiling on drug 

discovery and development strategy, ” Drug Discovery World , vol. 5, no. 

4, pp. 73 -86, 2004. 

[17]  M. Rowland, C. Peck, and G. Tucker,  “Physiologically -based 

pharmacokinetics in drug development and regulatory science, ” Annual 

Review of Pharmacology and Toxicology , vol. 51, pp. 45 -73, 2011. 

[18]  R. C. Aster, B. Borchers, and C. H. Thurber,  “Parameter estimation and 

inverse problems, ” Academic Press, 2018. 

[19]  R. T. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. K. Duvenaud,  “Neural 15 

> REPLACE THIS LINE WITH YOUR MANUSCRIPT ID NUMBER (DOUBLE -CLICK HERE TO EDIT) < 

ordinary differential equations, ” in  Advances  in  Neural Information 

Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , 2018. 

[20]  C. Rackauckas, Y. Ma, J. Martensen, C. Warner, K. Zubov, R. Supekar, 

D. Skinner, A. Ramadhan, and A. Edelman,  “Universal differential 

equations for scientific machine learning, ” arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2001.04385 , 2020. 

[21]  Z. S. Liu, W. Peng, H. Toropainen, A. Kheder, A. Rupp, H. Froning, X. 

Lin, and M. Boy,  “Inverse neural operator for ODE parameter 

optimization, ” arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.11854 , 2026. 

[22]  K. Li, Y. Chen, W. Li, J. He, and Y. Xue,  “Improved gene expression 

programming to solve the inverse problem for ordinary differential 

equations, ” Swarm and Evolutionary Computation , vol. 38, pp. 231 -239, 

2018. 

[23]  V. K. Dixit, J. Samaroo, A. Pal, A. Edelman, and C. V. Rackauckas, 

“Efficient GPU -accelerated global optimization for inverse problems, ”

in  ICLR 2024 Workshop on AI4DifferentialEquations  in Science , 2024. 

[24]  F. Chirigati,  “Inverse problem via a Bayesian approach, ” Nature 

Computational Science , vol. 1, pp. 304 -304, 2021. 

[25]  P. Zhao, L. Zhang, J. A. Grillo, Q. Liu, J. M. Bullock, Y. J. Moon, P. 

Song, S. S. Brar, R. Madabushi, T. C. Wu, and B. P. Booth, 

“Applications of physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) 

modeling and simulation during regulatory review, ” Clinical 

Pharmacology Therapeutics , vol. 89, no. 2, pp. 259 -267, 2011. 

[26]  A. Khambhawala, C. H. Lee, and J. I. Kwon,  “Accelerating drug 

discovery with hybrid physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) 

models: A Transformer -based approach for pharmacokinetic 

predictions, ” Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research , vol. 64, no. 

29, pp. 14601 -14615, 2025. 

[27]  D. E. Dawson, B. L. Ingle, K. A. Phillips, J. W. Nichols, J. F. Wambaugh, 

and R. Tornero -Velez,  “Designing QSARs for parameters of high -

throughput toxicokinetic models using open -source descriptors, ”

Environmental Science & Technology , vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 6505 -6517, 

2021. 

[28]  N. A. Daryakenari, M. De Florio, K. Shukla, and G. E. Karniadakis,  “AI -

Aristotle: A physics -informed framework for systems biology gray -box 

identification, ” PLOS Computational Biology , vol. 20, no. 3, p. 

e1011916, 2024. 

[29]  Z. Lin and W. -C. Chou,  “Machine learning and artificial intelligence in 

toxicological sciences, ” Toxicological Sciences , vol. 189, no. 1, pp. 7 -

19, 2022. 

[30]  Z. Wei and J. Liu,  “Evolutionary neural architecture search for physics -

informed neural networks with variable -length designs, ” IEEE 

Transactions on Evolutionary Computation , pp. 1 -1, 2026. 

[31]  H. Wang, Y. Pu, S. Song, and G. Huang,  “Advancing generalization in 

PINNs through latent -space representations, ” IEEE Transactions on 

Neural Networks and Learning Systems , vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 20243 -

20257, 2025. 

[32]  J. C. Wong, A. Gupta, C. C. Ooi, P. -H. Chiu, J. Liu, and Y. -S. Ong, 

“Evolutionary optimization of physics -informed neural networks: Evo -

PINN Frontiers and opportunities, ” IEEE Computational Intelligence 

Magazine , vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 16 -36, 2026. 

[33]  H. Zhang, L. Liu, K. Weng, and L. Lu,  “Federated scientific machine 

learning for approximating functions and solving differential equations 

with data heterogeneity, ” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and 

Learning Systems , vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 18104 -18117, 2025. 

[34]  J. C. Wong, C. C. Ooi, A. Gupta, and Y. -S. Ong,  “Learning in sinusoidal 

spaces with physics -informed neural networks, ” IEEE Transactions on 

Artificial Intelligence , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 985 -1000, 2022. 

[35]  L. Chen, X. Dong, Y. Wang, W. Sun, B. Wang, and G. Harrison, 

“Physics -informed neural network for microgrid forward/inverse 

ordinary differential equations, ” in  2024 IEEE Power & Energy Society 

General Meeting (PESGM) , 2024. 

[36]  V. C. Dinh, B. Lali ć, M. Petri ć, T. B. Nguyen, and M. Roantree, 

“Adapting physics -informed neural networks to improve ODE 

optimization in mosquito population dynamics, ” PLOS O ne , vol. 19, no. 

12, p. e0315762, 2024. 

[37]  E. Naghavi, H. Wang, L. Fan, J. S. Choy, G. Kassab, S. Baek, and L. -C. 

Lee,  “Rapid estimation of left ventricular contractility with a physics -

informed neural network inverse modeling approach, ” Artificial 

Intelligence in Medicine , vol. 157, p. 102995, 2024. 

[38]  C. D. Wickramasinghe, K. C. Weerasinghe, and P. K. Ranaweera, 

“PBPK -iPINNs: Inverse physics -informed neural networks for 

physiologically based pharmacokinetic brain models, ” arXiv preprint 

arXiv:.12666 , 2025. 

[39]  V. Minadakis,  “Application of physics informed neural networks in the 

development of physiologically based  kineti c models, ” National 

Technical University of Athens, 2023. 

[40]  J. F. Urbá n, P. Stefanou, and J. A. Pons,  “Unveiling the optimization 

process of physics informed neural networks: How accurate and 

competitive can PINNs be? ” Journal of Computational Physics , vol. 523, 

p. 113656, 2025. 

[41]  R. H. Pletcher, J. C. Tannehill, and D. Anderson,  “Computational fluid 

mechanics and heat transfer ,” CRC Press, 2012. 

[42]  V. Lukacova, N. Parrott, T. Lave, G. Fraczkiewicz, M. Bolger, and W. 

Woltosz,  “General approach to calculation of tissue: Plasma partition 

coefficients for physiologically based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) 

modeling, ” in  AAPS National Annual Meeting  and  Exposition , 2008. 

[43]  D. Sun, H. Lennernas, L. S. Welage, J. L. Barnett, C. P. Landowski, D. 

Foster, D. Fleisher, K. D. Lee, and G. L. Amidon,  “Comparison of 

human duodenum and Caco -2 gene expression profiles for 12,000 gene 

sequences tags and correlation with permeability of 26 drugs, ”

Pharmaceutical Research , vol. 19, no. 10, pp. 1400 -1416, 2002. 

[44]  M. K. Ladumor, A. Thakur, S. Sharma, A. Rachapally, S. Mishra, P. 

Bobe, V. K. Rao, P. Pammi, H. Kangne, D. Levi, and A. Balhara,  “A

repository of protein abundance data of drug metabolizing enzymes and 

transporters for applications in physiologically based pharmacokinetic 

(PBPK) modelling and simulation, ” Scientific Reports , vol. 9, no. 1, p. 

9709, 2019. 

[45]  M. D. Rawlins, D. B. Henderson, and A. R. Hijab,  “Pharmacokinetics of 

paracetamol (acetaminophen) after intravenous and oral administration, ”

European Journal of Clinical Pharmacology , vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 283 -286, 

1977. 

[46]  M. A. Branch, T. F. Coleman, and Y. Li,  “A subspace, interior, and 

conjugate gradient method for large -scale bound -constrained 

minimization problems, ” SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing , vol. 21, 

no. 1, pp. 1 -23, 1999. 

[47]  J. Bakarji, J. Callaham, S. L. Brunton, and J. N. Kutz,  “Dimensionally 

consistent learning with Buckingham Pi, ” Nature Computational 

Science , vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 834 -844, 2022. 

[48]  C. Fang, Y. Wang, R. Grater, S. Kapadnis, C. Black, P. Trapa, and S. 

Sciabola,  “Prospective validation of machine learning algorithms for 

absorption, distribution, metabolism, and excretion prediction: An 

industrial perspective, ” Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling ,

vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 3263 -3274, 2023. 

[49]  Y. J. Duan, L. Fu, X. C. Zhang, T. Z. Long, Y. H. He, Z. Q. Liu, A. P. 

Lu, Y. F. Deng, C. Y. Hsieh, T. J. Hou, and D. S. Cao,  “Improved GNNs 

for log  D7.4  prediction by transferring knowledge from low -fidelity data, ”

Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling , vol. 63, no. 8, pp. 2345 -

2359, 2023. 

[50]  H. R. Ha, J. Chen, A. Freiburghaus, and F. Follath,  “Metabolism of 

theophylline by cDNA -expressed human cytochromes P -450, ” British 

Journal of Clinical Pharmacology , vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 321 -326, 1995. 

[51]  J. Tjia, J. Colbert, and D. J. Back,  “Theophylline metabolism in human 

liver microsomes: Inhibition studies, ” The Journal of Pharmacology and 

Experimental Therapeutics , vol. 276, no. 3, pp. 912 -917, 1996. 

[52]  F. A. Chrzanowski, P. J. Niebergall, R. L. Mayock, J. M. Taubin, and E. 

T. Sugita,  “Kinetics of intravenous theophylline, ” Clinical 

Pharmacology & Therapeutics , vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 188 -195, 1977. 1

# Supplement ary  Material 

Table S 1. PBPK  model parameters for paracetamol 

Parameters  Value  Reference 

Physiochemical properties 

Molecular weight (g/mol)  151.7  PubChem 

fu,b  0.82 0

Ladumor  et al.  2019 1Rb 1.58 0

LogP  0.51 0

pK a 9.46 0

Compound type  Monoprotic acid  -

Absorption 

Peff,man  (m/h)  0.0432  Ladumor  et al.  2019 1

Intrinsic solubility (mg/L)  13650 

Distribution 

Vd (L/kg)  0.9 00  Ladumor  et al.  2019 1

Kp Adipose  0.375 

Calculated from V d

Kp Bone  0.898 

Kp Brain  1.334 

Kp Gut  1.238 

Kp Heart  1.110 

Kp Kidney  1.114 

Kp Liver  1.151 

Kp Lung  1.081 

Kp Muscle  1.022 

Kp Pancreas  1.199 

Kp RestOfBody  1.022 

Kp Skin  1.069 

Kp Spleen  1.148 

Metabolism 

fu,incubation  0.922  Predicted 

UGT1A1 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.323 

Ladumor  et al.  2019 1

UGT1A1 K m (μM)  5500 

UGT1A9 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.540 

UGT1A9 K m (μM)  9200 

UGT2B15 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  1.801 

UGT2B15 K m (μM)  23000 

SULT1A1 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.0769 

SULT1A1 K m (μM)  2400 

SULT1A3 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.0115 

SULT1A3 K m (μM)  1500 

SULT1E1 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.00830 

SULT1E1 K m (μM)  1900 

SULT2A1 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.0404 

SULT2A1 K m (μM)  3700 

CYP1A2 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.00168 

CYP1A2 K m (μM)  220 

CYP2C9 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.000479 

CYP2C9 K m (μM)  660 

CYP2C19 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.00145 

CYP2C19 K m (μM)  2000 

CYP2D6 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.000319 

CYP2D6 K m (μM)  440 

CYP2E1 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.00437 

CYP2E1 K m (μM)  4020 2

CYP3A4 V max  (μmol/h/mg protein)  0.00302 

CYP3A4 K m (μM)  130 

Excretion 

CL R (L/h)  1.379  Ladumor  et al.  2019 1

Table S2. PBPK model parameters for theophylline 

Parameters  Value  Reference 

Physiochemical properties 

Molecular weight (g/mol)  180.2  PubChem 

fu,b  0. 50 0 Lombardo  et al.  20 04 2

Rb 0.815  Habib  et al.  1987 3

LogP  -0.020  Hansch  et al.  1995 4

pK a 1 8.800  PubChem 

pK a 2 0.990  PubChem 

Compound type  Zwitterion  -

Absorption 

Peff,man  (m/h)  0.0 178  Kus  et al.  20 23 5

Intrinsic solubility (mg/L)  6660  Li  et al.  2024 6

Distribution 

Vd (L/kg)  0.500  Peck  et al.  1985 7

KpAdipose  0. 117 

Calculated from V d

KpBone  0. 303 

KpBrain  0.458 

KpGut  0.482 

KpHeart  0.474 

KpKidney  0. 454 

KpLiver  0. 431 

KpLung  0.497 

KpMuscle  0. 393 

KpPancreas  0. 437 

KpRest OfBody  0. 393 

KpSkin  0. 489 

KpSpleen  0.453 

Metabolism 

fu,incubation  0.9 31  Predicted 

CYP1A2 (→ 1-MX)  Vmax  (μmol/h/pmol)  3.60 x 10 -4

Ha  et al.  1995 8

CYP1A2 (→ 1-MX)  Km (μM)  380 

CYP1A2 (→3 -MX)  Vmax  (μmol/h/pmol)  1.48 x 10 -4

CYP1A2 (→3 -MX)  Km (μM)  1090 

CYP1A2 (→D MU)  Vmax  (μmol/h/pmol)  4.39 x 10 -4

CYP1A2 (→D MU)  Km (μM)  230 

CYP2E1 (→D MU)  Vmax  (μmol/h/pmol)  4.12 x 10 -3

CYP2E1 (→D MU)  Km (μM)  15300 

ISEF CYP (→D MU)  0.500  Optimized 

Excretion 

CL R (L/h)  0.310  Abduljalil  et al.  2022 93

Table S 3. ODEs list for 22 ODE -system (IV scenario) 

Description  ODEs 

General ODEs 

Distribution in 

venous blood 

d( CVenousBlood )/dt = 1/ VVenousBlood *( -(QLung *CVenousBlood ) + (( QBrain *CBrain *Rb )/( Kp Brain )) + (( QHeart *CHeart *Rb )/( Kp Heart )) + (( QLiver *CLiver *Rb )/( Kp Liver )) + 

(( QAdipose *CAdipose *Rb )/( Kp Adipose )) + (( QSkin *CSkin *Rb )/( Kp Skin )) + (( QMuscle *CMuscle *Rb )/( Kp Muscle )) + (( QBone *CBone *Rb )/( Kp Bone )) + 

(( QRestOfBody *CRestOfBody *Rb )/( Kp RestOfBody )) + (( QKidney *CKidney *Rb )/( Kp Kidney ))) 

Distribution in 

arterial blood 

d( CArterialBlood )/dt = 1/ VArterialBlood *((( QLung *CLung *Rb)/( Kp Lung ))  - (QBrain *CArterialBlood ) - (QHeart *CArterialBlood ) - (QStomach *CArterialBlood ) - (QSpleen *CArterialBlood )

- (QPancreas *CArterialBlood ) - (QHepaticArtery *CArterialBlood ) - (QAdipose *CArterialBlood ) - (QSkin *CArterialBlood ) - (QMuscle *CArterialBlood ) - (QBone *CArterialBlood ) -

(QRestOfBody *CArterialBlood ) - (QKidney *CArterialBlood ) - (QDuodenum *CArterialBlood ) - (QJejunum *CArterialBlood ) - (QIleum *CArterialBlood ) - (QLargeIntestine *CArterialBlood )) 

Distribution in 

brain 

d( CBrain )/dt = 1/ VBrain *(( QBrain *CArterialBlood ) - (( QBrain *CBrain *Rb)/( Kp Brain ))) 

Distribution in lung  d( CLung )/dt = 1/ VLung *(( QLung *CArterialBlood ) - (( QLung *CLung *Rb)/( Kp Lung ))) 

Distribution in heart  d( CHeart )/dt = 1/ VHeart *(( QHeart *CArterialBlood ) - (( QHeart *CHeart *Rb)/( Kp Heart ))) 

Distribution in 

spleen 

d( CSpleen )/dt = 1/ VSpleen *(( QSpleen *CArterialBlood ) - (( QSpleen *CSpleen *Rb)/( Kp Spleen ))) 

Distribution in 

pancreas 

d( CPancreas )/dt = 1/ VPancreas *(( QPancreas *CArterialBlood ) - (( QPancreas *CPancreas *Rb)/( Kp Pancreas ))) 

Distribution in 

adipose 

d( CAdipose )/dt = 1/ VAdipose *(( QAdipose *CArterialBlood ) - (( QAdipose *CAdipose *Rb)/( Kp Adipose ))) 

Distribution in skin  d( CSkin )/dt = 1/ VSkin *(( QSkin *CArterialBlood ) - (( QSkin *CSkin *Rb)/( Kp Skin ))) 

Distribution in 

muscle 

d( CMuscle )/dt = 1/ VMuscle *(( QMuscle *CArterialBlood ) - (( QMuscle *CMuscle *Rb)/( Kp Muscle ))) 

Distribution in bone  d( CBone )/dt = 1/ VBone *(( QBone *CArterialBlood ) - (( QBone *CBone *Rb)/( Kp Bone ))) 

Distribution in rest 

of body 

d( CRestOfBody )/dt = 1/ VRestOfBody *(( QRestOfBody *CArterialBlood ) - (( QRestOfBody *CRestOfBody *Rb)/( Kp RestOfBody ))) 

Distribution  + renal 

clearance  in kidney 

d( CKidney )/dt = 1/ VKidney *(( QKidney *CArterialBlood ) - (( QKidney *CKidney *Rb)/( Kp Kidney ))  - (CL R*CKidney )) 

Renally excreted 

drug  in urine 

d( CUrine )/dt = 1/ VUrine *(( CL R*CKidney )) 

Distribution in 

portal vein 

d(CPortalVein )/ dt  = 1/ VPortalVein *((( QStomach *CStomach *Rb)/( Kp Gut )) + (( QSpleen *CSpleen *Rb)/( Kp Spleen )) + (( QPancreas *CPancreas *Rb)/( Kp Pancreas ))  -

(QPortalVein *CPortalVein ) + (( QDuodenum *CDuodenumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut )) + (( QJejunum *CJejunumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut )) + (( QIleum *CIleumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut )) + 

(( QLargeIntestine *CLargeIntestineWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 

Distribution in 

stomach 

d(CStomach )/ dt  = 1/ VStomach *(( QStomach *CArterialBlood ) - (( QStomach *CStomach *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 

Distribution in 

duodenum 

d(CDuodenumWall )/ dt  = 1/ VDuodenumWall *(( QDuodenum *CArterialBlood ) - (( QDuodenum *CDuodenumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 4

Distribution in 

jejunum 

d(CJejunumWall )/ dt  = 1/ VJejunumWall *(( QJejunum *CArterialBlood ) - (( QJejunum *CJejunumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 

Distribution in 

ileum 

d(CIleumWall )/ dt  = 1/ VIleumWall *(( QIleum *CArterialBlood ) - (( QIleum *CIleumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 

Distribution in large 

intestine 

d(CLargeIntestineWall )/ dt  = 1/ VLargeIntestineWall *(( QLargeIntestine *CArterialBlood ) - (( QLargeIntestine *CLargeIntestineWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 

Drug -specific ODEs 

Paracetamol 

metabolism + 

distribution in liver 

d(CLiver )/ dt  = 1/ VLiver *(( QPortalVein *CPortalVein ) + ( QHepaticArtery *CArterialBlood ) - (( QLiver *CLiver *Rb)/( Kp Liver ))  -

(( Vmax (UGT1A9 )/(( Km(UGT1A9 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (UGT1A1 )/(( Km(UGT1A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (UGT2B15 )/(( Km(UGT2B15 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (SULT1A1 )/(( Km(SULT1A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (SULT1A3 )/(( Km(SULT1A3 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (SULT1E1 )/(( Km(SULT1E1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (SULT2A1 )/(( Km(SULT2A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP1A2 )/(( Km(CYP1A2 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP2C9 )/(( Km(CYP2C9 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP2C19 )/(( Km(CYP2C19 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP2D6 )/(( Km(CYP2D6 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP2E1 )/(( Km(CYP2E1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP3A4 )/(( Km(CYP3A4 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver )) 

Paracetamol 

metabolite 

formation in liver 

d(CLiver (Metabolite) )/ dt  = 1/ VLiver *((( Vmax (UGT1A9 )/(( Km(UGT1A9 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (UGT1A1 )/(( Km(UGT1A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (UGT2B15 )/(( Km(UGT2B15 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (SULT1A1 )/(( Km(SULT1A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (SULT1A3 )/(( Km(SULT1A3 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (SULT1E1 )/(( Km(SULT1E1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (SULT2A1 )/(( Km(SULT2A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP1A2 )/(( Km(CYP1A2 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP2C9 )/(( Km(CYP2C9 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP2C19 )/(( Km(CYP2C19 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP2D6 )/(( Km(CYP2D6 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP2E1 )/(( Km(CYP2E1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP3A4 )/(( Km(CYP3A4 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver )) 

Theophylline 

metabolism + 

distribution in liver 

d(CLiver )/ dt  = 1/ VLiver *(( QPortalVein *CPortalVein ) + ( QHepaticArtery *CArterialBlood ) - (( QLiver *CLiver *Rb)/( Kp Liver ))  -

(( CYP1A2 (1MX )ISEF *Vmax (CYP1A2 (1MX ))* CYP1A2 Abundance,Liver )/( Km(CYP1A2 (1MX ))* fu,mic +(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver *( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver 

) -

(( CYP1A2 (3MX )ISEF *Vmax (CYP1A2 (3MX ))* CYP1A2 Abundance,Liver )/( Km(CYP1A2 (3MX ))* fu,mic +(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver *( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver 5

) - (( DMU ISEF *Vmax (CYP1A2 (DMU ))* CYP1A2 Abundance,Liver )/( Km(CYP1A2 (DMU ))* fu,mic +(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver *( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( DMU ISEF *Vmax (CYP2E1 (DMU ))* CYP2E1 Abundance,Liver )/( Km(CYP2E1 (DMU ))* fu,mic +(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver *( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver )) 

Theophylline 

metabolite 

formation in liver 

d(CLiver (Metabolite) )/ dt  =

1/ VLiver *((( CYP1A2 (1MX )ISEF *Vmax (CYP1A2 (1MX ))* CYP1A2 Abundance,Liver )/( Km(CYP1A2 (1MX ))* fu,mic +(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver *( CLiver *fu,b )* 

Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( CYP1A2 (3MX )ISEF *Vmax (CYP1A2 (3MX ))* CYP1A2 Abundance,Liver )/( Km(CYP1A2 (3MX ))* fu,mic CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver *( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( DMU ISEF *Vmax (CYP1A2 (DMU ))* CYP1A2 Abundance,Liver )/( Km(CYP1A2 (DMU ))* fu,mic +(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver *( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( DMU ISEF *Vmax (CYP2E1 (DMU ))* CYP2E1 Abundance,Liver )/( Km(CYP2E1 (DMU ))* fu,mic +(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver *( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver )) 6

Table S4. ODEs list for  33  ODE -system ( oral  scenario) 

Description  ODEs 

General ODEs 

Distribution in 

venous blood 

d(CVenousBlood )/ dt  = 1/ VVenousBlood *( -(QLung *CVenousBlood ) + (( QBrain *CBrain *Rb)/( Kp Brain )) + (( QHeart *CHeart *Rb)/( Kp Heart )) + (( QLiver *CLiver *Rb)/( Kp Liver )) + 

(( QAdipose *CAdipose *Rb)/( Kp Adipose )) + (( QSkin *CSkin *Rb)/( Kp Skin )) + (( QMuscle *CMuscle *Rb)/( Kp Muscle )) + (( QBone *CBone *Rb)/( Kp Bone )) + 

(( QRestOfBody *CRestOfBody *Rb)/( Kp RestOfBody )) + (( QKidney *CKidney *Rb)/( Kp Kidney ))) 

Distribution in 

arterial blood 

d(CArterialBlood )/ dt  = 1/ VArterialBlood *((( QLung *CLung *Rb)/( Kp Lung ))  - (QBrain *CArterialBlood ) - (QHeart *CArterialBlood ) - (QStomach *CArterialBlood ) - (QSpleen *CArterialBlood )

- (QPancreas *CArterialBlood ) - (QHepaticArtery *CArterialBlood ) - (QAdipose *CArterialBlood ) - (QSkin *CArterialBlood ) - (QMuscle *CArterialBlood ) - (QBone *CArterialBlood ) -

(QRestOfBody *CArterialBlood ) - (QKidney *CArterialBlood ) - (QDuodenum *CArterialBlood ) - (QJejunum *CArterialBlood ) - (QIleum *CArterialBlood ) - (QLargeIntestine *CArterialBlood )) 

Distribution in 

brain 

d(CBrain )/ dt  = 1/ VBrain *(( QBrain *CArterialBlood ) - (( QBrain *CBrain *Rb)/( Kp Brain ))) 

Distribution in lung  d(CLung )/ dt  = 1/ VLung *(( QLung *CVenousBlood ) - (( QLung *CLung *Rb)/( Kp Lung ))) 

Distribution in heart  d(CHeart )/ dt  = 1/ VHeart *(( QHeart *CArterialBlood ) - (( QHeart *CHeart *Rb)/( Kp Heart ))) 

Distribution in 

spleen 

d(CSpleen )/ dt  = 1/ VSpleen *(( QSpleen *CArterialBlood ) - (( QSpleen *CSpleen *Rb)/( Kp Spleen ))) 

Distribution in 

pancreas 

d(CPancreas )/ dt  = 1/ VPancreas *(( QPancreas *CArterialBlood ) - (( QPancreas *CPancreas *Rb)/( Kp Pancreas ))) 

Distribution in 

adipose 

d(CAdipose )/ dt  = 1/ VAdipose *(( QAdipose *CArterialBlood ) - (( QAdipose *CAdipose *Rb)/( Kp Adipose ))) 

Distribution in skin  d(CSkin )/ dt  = 1/ VSkin *(( QSkin *CArterialBlood ) - (( QSkin *CSkin *Rb)/( Kp Skin ))) 

Distribution in 

muscle 

d(CMuscle )/ dt  = 1/ VMuscle *(( QMuscle *CArterialBlood ) - (( QMuscle *CMuscle *Rb)/( Kp Muscle ))) 

Distribution in bone  d(CBone )/ dt  = 1/ VBone *(( QBone *CArterialBlood ) - (( QBone *CBone *Rb)/( Kp Bone ))) 

Distribution in rest 

of body 

d(CRestOfBody )/ dt  = 1/ VRestOfBody *(( QRestOfBody *CArterialBlood ) - (( QRestOfBody *CRestOfBody *Rb)/( Kp RestOfBody ))) 

Distribution + renal 

clearance in kidney 

d(CKidney )/ dt  = 1/ VKidney *(( QKidney *CArterialBlood ) - (( QKidney *CKidney *Rb)/( Kp Kidney ))  - (CL R*CKidney )) 

Renally excreted 

drug in urine 

d(CUrine )/ dt  = 1/ VUrine *(( CL R*CKidney )) 

Distribution in 

portal vein 

d(CPortalVein )/ dt  = 1/ VPortalVein *((( QStomach *CStomach *Rb)/( Kp Gut )) + (( QSpleen *CSpleen *Rb)/( Kp Spleen )) + (( QPancreas *CPancreas *Rb)/( Kp Pancreas ))  -

(QPortalVein *CPortalVein ) + (( QDuodenum *CDuodenumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut )) + (( QJejunum *CJejunumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut )) + (( QIleum *CIleumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut )) + 

(( QLargeIntestine *CLargeIntestineWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 

Distribution in 

stomach 

d(CStomach )/ dt  = 1/ VStomach *(( QStomach *CArterialBlood ) - (( QStomach *CStomach *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) + (( ka Stomach *CStomachFluid )* VStomachFluid )) 

Distribution in 

duodenum 

d(CDuodenumWall )/ dt  = 1/ VDuodenumWall *((( ka Duodenum *CDuodenumLumen )* VDuodenumLumen ) + ( QDuodenum *CArterialBlood ) - (( QDuodenum *CDuodenumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 7

Distribution in 

jejunum 

d(CJejunumWall )/ dt  = 1/ VJejunumWall *((( ka Jejunum *CJejunumLumen )* VJejunumLumen ) + ( QJejunum *CArterialBlood ) - (( QJejunum *CJejunumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 

Distribution in 

ileum 

d(CIleumWall )/ dt  = 1/ VIleumWall *((( ka Ileum *CIleumLumen )* VIleumLumen ) + ( QIleum *CArterialBlood ) - (( QIleum *CIleumWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 

Distribution in large 

intestine 

d(CLargeIntestineWall )/ dt  = 1/ VLargeIntestineWall *((( ka LargeIntestine *CLargeIntestineLumen )* VLargeIntestineLumen ) + ( QLargeIntestine *CArterialBlood ) -

(( QLargeIntestine *CLargeIntestineWall *Rb)/( Kp Gut ))) 

Drug dissolution + 

transit in stomach 

(solid drug) 

d(C(Solid )StomachFluid )/ dt  = -(Dissolution_Parameter *C(Solid )StomachFluid *( Solubility Stomach -CStomachFluid ))  - (kt Stomach *C(Solid )StomachFluid )

Drug dissolution + 

transit in stomach 

(solubilized drug) 

d(CStomachFluid )/ dt  = 1/ VStomachFluid *(( Dissolution_Parameter *C(Solid )StomachFluid *( Solubility Stomach -CStomachFluid ))  - (( kt Stomach *CStomachFluid )* VStomachFluid ) -

(( ka Stomach *CStomachFluid )* VStomachFluid )

Drug dissolution + 

transit in duodenum 

(solid drug) 

d(C(Solid )DuodenumLumen )/ dt  = -(Dissolution_Parameter *C(Solid )DuodenumLumen *( Solubility Duodenum -CDuodenumLumen )) + ( kt Stomach *C(Solid )StomachFluid ) -

(kt Duodenum *C(Solid )DuodenumLumen )

Drug dissolution + 

transit in duodenum 

(solubilized drug) 

d(CDuodenumLumen )/ dt  = 1/ VDuodenumLumen *(( Dissolution_Parameter *C(Solid )DuodenumLumen *( Solubility Duodenum -CDuodenumLumen )) + 

(( kt Stomach *CStomachFluid )* VStomachFluid ) - (( kt Duodenum *CDuodenumLumen )* VDuodenumLumen ) - (( ka Duodenum *CDuodenumLumen )* VDuodenumLumen )) 

Drug dissolution + 

transit in jejunum 

(solid drug) 

d(C(Solid )JejunumLumen )/ dt  = -(Dissolution_Parameter *C(Solid )JejunumLumen *( Solubility Jejunum -CJejunumLumen )) + ( kt Duodenum *C(Solid )DuodenumLumen ) -

(kt Jejunum *C(Solid )JejunumLumen )

Drug dissolution + 

transit in jejunum 

(solubilized drug) 

d(CJejunumLumen )/ dt  = 1/ VJejunumLumen *(( Dissolution_Parameter *C(Solid )JejunumLumen *( Solubility Jejunum -CJejunumLumen )) + 

(( kt Duodenum *CDuodenumLumen )* VDuodenumLumen ) - (( kt Jejunum *CJejunumLumen )* VJejunumLumen ) - (( ka Jejunum *CJejunumLumen )* VJejunumLumen )) 

Drug dissolution + 

transit in ileum 

(solid drug) 

d(C(Solid )IleumLumen )/ dt  = -(Dissolution_Parameter *C(Solid )IleumLumen *( Solubility Ileum -CIleumLumen )) + ( kt Jejunum *C(Solid )JejunumLumen ) -

(kt Ileum *C(Solid )IleumLumen )

Drug dissolution + 

transit in ileum 

(solubilized drug) 

d(CIleumLumen )/ dt  = 1/ VIleumLumen *(( Dissolution_Parameter *C(Solid )IleumLumen *( Solubility Ileum -CIleumLumen )) + (( kt Jejunum *CJejunumLumen )* VJejunumLumen ) -

(( kt Ileum *CIleumLumen )* VIleumLumen ) - (( ka Ileum *CIleumLumen )* VIleumLumen )) 

Drug dissolution + 

transit in large 

intestine (solid 

drug) 

d(C(Solid )LargeIntestineLumen )/ dt  = -(Dissolution_Parameter *C(Solid )LargeIntestineLumen *( Solubility LargeIntestine -CLargeIntestineLumen )) + ( kt Ileum *C(Solid )IleumLumen ) -

(kt LargeIntestine *C(Solid )LargeIntestineLumen )

Drug dissolution + 

transit in large 

intestine 

(solubilized drug) 

d(CLargeIntestineLumen )/ dt  = 1/ VLargeIntestineLumen *(( Dissolution_Parameter *C(Solid )LargeIntestineLumen *( Solubility LargeIntestine -CLargeIntestineLumen )) + 

(( kt Ileum *CIleumLumen )* VIleumLumen ) - (( kt LargeIntestine *CLargeIntestineLumen )* VLargeIntestineLumen ) - (( ka LargeIntestine *CLargeIntestineLumen )* VLargeIntestineLumen )) 8

Drug amount 

excreted in feaces 

d(CFeaces )/ dt  = 1/ VFeaces *(( kt LargeIntestine *C(Solid )LargeIntestineLumen ) + (( kt LargeIntestine *CLargeIntestineLumen )* VLargeIntestineLumen )) 

Drug -specific ODEs 

Paracetamol 

metabolism + 

distribution in liver 

d(CLiver )/ dt  = 1/ VLiver *(( QPortalVein *CPortalVein ) + ( QHepaticArtery *CArterialBlood ) - (( QLiver *CLiver *Rb)/( Kp Liver ))  -

(( Vmax (UGT1A9 )/(( Km(UGT1A9 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (UGT1A1 )/(( Km(UGT1A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (UGT2B15 )/(( Km(UGT2B15 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (SULT1A1 )/(( Km(SULT1A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (SULT1A3 )/(( Km(SULT1A3 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (SULT1E1 )/(( Km(SULT1E1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (SULT2A1 )/(( Km(SULT2A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP1A2 )/(( Km(CYP1A2 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP2C9 )/(( Km(CYP2C9 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP2C19 )/(( Km(CYP2C19 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP2D6 )/(( Km(CYP2D6 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP2E1 )/(( Km(CYP2E1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) -

(( Vmax (CYP3A4 )/(( Km(CYP3A4 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver )) 

Paracetamol 

metabolite 

formation in liver 

d(CLiver (Metabolite) )/ dt  = 1/ VLiver *((( Vmax (UGT1A9 )/(( Km(UGT1A9 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (UGT1A1 )/(( Km(UGT1A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (UGT2B15 )/(( Km(UGT2B15 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (SULT1A1 )/(( Km(SULT1A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (SULT1A3 )/(( Km(SULT1A3 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (SULT1E1 )/(( Km(SULT1E1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (SULT2A1 )/(( Km(SULT2A1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* CPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP1A2 )/(( Km(CYP1A2 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP2C9 )/(( Km(CYP2C9 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP2C19 )/(( Km(CYP2C19 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP2D6 )/(( Km(CYP2D6 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP2E1 )/(( Km(CYP2E1 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver ) + 

(( Vmax (CYP3A4 )/(( Km(CYP3A4 )* fu,mic )+(( CLiver /Mw)* fu,b ))* MPPGL *WLiver )*( CLiver *fu,b )* Rb/Kp Liver )) 9

Table S 5. Compartments list for paracetamol and theophylline model 

Compartment  Volume (L) 

Paracetamol  Theophylline 

Arterial  blood  0.966  1.051 

Venous  blood  3.100  3.374 

Brain  1.337  1.323 

Lung  1.096  0.651 

Heart  0.782  0.355 

Spleen  0.136  0.149 

Pancreas  0.134  0.139 

Adipose  18.970  15.148 

Skin  2.877  3.759 

Muscle  26.739  32.321 

Bone  7.745  4.269 

Rest  of b ody  0.324  6.836 

Kidney  0.283  0.323 

Portal  vein  1.000  1.000 

Stomach  0.138  0.152 

Duodenum  wall  0.051  0.057 

Jejunum  wall  0.258  0.284 

Ileum  wall  0.285  0.314 

Large  intestine  wall  0.341  0.375 

Liver  1.598  1.591 

Urine  1.000  1.000 

For 33 ODE -system with oral dosing 

Stomach  fluid  0.045 

NA 

Duodenum  lumen  0.009 

Jejunum  lumen  0.046 

Ileum  lumen  0.050 

Large  intestine  lumen  0.013 

Feaces  1.000 10 

Table S6.  Systems parameter list for paracetamol and theophylline model 

Parameter  Unit  Value 

Paracetamol  Theophylline 

QBrain  liter/hour  46.800  46.361 

QLung  liter/hour  390.000  386.343 

QHeart  liter/hour  15.600  15.454 

QStomach  liter/hour  3.900  3.863 

QSpleen  liter/hour  11.700  11.590 

QPancreas  liter/hour  3.900  3.863 

QLiver  liter/hour  99.450  98.517 

QAdipose  liter/hour  19.500  19.317 

QSkin  liter/hour  19.500  19.317 

QMuscle  liter/hour  66.300  65.678 

QBone  liter/hour  19.500  19.317 

QRestOfBody  liter/hour  29.250  28.976 

QKidney  liter/hour  74.100  73.405 

QPortalVein  liter/hour  74.100  73.405 

QHepaticArtery  liter/hour  25.350  25.112 

MPPGL  milligram/gram  40.161  39.791 

WLiver  gram  1726.027  1718.567 

QDuodenum  liter /hour  3.370  3.323 

QJejunum  liter/hour  16.910  16.767 

QIleum  liter/hour  18.720  18.544 

QLargeIntestine  liter/hour  15.600  15.454 

CYP1A2 Abundance ,Liver  picomole/milligram  NA  36.400 

CYP2E1 Abundance,Liver  picomole/milligram  NA  61.000 

CPPGL  milligram/gram  80.000  NA 

For 33 ODE -system with oral dosing 

Dissolution_Parameter  liter/(milligram*hour)  0.076 

NA 

Solubility Duodenum  milligram/liter  13661.889 

Solubility Ileum  milligram/liter  13709.584 

Solubility Jejunum  milligram/liter  13668.842 

Solubility LargeIntestine  milligram/liter  13664.967 

Solubility Stomach  milligram/liter  13650.000 

kaDuodenum  1/hour  3.646 

ka Ileum  1/hour  5.760 

ka Jejunum  1/hour  4.937 

ka LargeIntestine  1/hour  3.570 

ka Sto mach  1/hour  4.320 

kt Duodenum  1/hour  3.125 

kt Ileum  1/hour  0.455 

kt Jejunum  1/hour  0.676 

kt LargeIntestine  1/hour  0.028 

kt Stomach  1/hour  0.857 11 

References 

1.  M. K. Ladumor, A. Thakur, S. Sharma  et al. , “A repository of protein abundance data 

of drug metabolizing enzymes and transporters for applications in physiologically 

based pharmacokinetic (PBPK) modelling and simulation,”  Sci. Rep. , vol. 9, no. 1, Art. 

no. 9709, Jul. 2019, doi: 10.1038/s41598 -019 -46075 -8

2.  F. Lombardo, R. S. Obach, M. Y. Shalaeva, and F. Gao, “Prediction of human volume 

of distribution values for neutral and basic drugs. 2. Extended data set and leave -class -

out statistics,”  J. Med. Chem. , vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 1242 –1250, Feb. 2004. doi: 

10.1021/jm030408h 

3.  M. P. Habib, R. B. Schifman, B. Y. Shon, J. F. Fiastro, and S. C. Campbell, “Evaluation 

of whole blood theophylline enzyme immunochromatography assay,”  Chest , vol. 92, 

no. 1, pp. 129 –131, Jul. 1987. doi: 10.1378/chest.92.1.129 

4.  C. Hansch, A. Leo, and D. Hoekman,  Exploring QSAR: Hydrophobic, Electronic, and 

Steric Constants , vol. 2. Washington, DC, USA: Amer. Chem. Soc., 1995. 

5.  M. Kus, I. Ibragimow, and H. Piotrowska -Kempisty, “Caco -2 cell line standardization 

with pharmaceutical requirements and in vitro model suitability for permeability 

assays,”  Pharmaceutics , vol. 15, no. 11, Art. no. 2523, Oct. 2023. doi: 

10.3390/pharmaceutics15112523 

6.  Q. Li, Y. Xie, Z. Wang  et al. , “Optimization of physicochemical properties of 

theophylline by forming cocrystals with amino acids,”  RSC Adv. , vol. 14, no. 54, pp. 

40006 –40017, Nov. 2024. doi: 10.1039/d4ra06804a 

7.  C. C. Peck, A. I. Nichols, J. Baker, L. L. Lenert, and D. Ezra, “Clinical 

pharmacodynamics of theophylline,”  J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. , vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 292 –

297, Aug. 1985. doi: 10.1016/0091 -6749(85)90644 -x

8.  H. R. Ha, J. Chen, A. U. Freiburghaus, and F. Follath, “Metabolism of theophylline by 

cDNA -expressed human cytochromes P -450,”  Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. , vol. 39, no. 3, 

pp. 321 –326, Mar. 1995. doi: 10.1111/j.1365 -2125.1995.tb04455.x 

9.  K. Abduljalil, I. Gardner, and M. Jamei, “Application of a physiologically based 

pharmacokinetic approach to predict theophylline pharmacokinetics using virtual non -

pregnant, pregnant, fetal, breast -feeding, and neonatal populations,”  Front. Pediatr. , vol. 

10, Art. no. 840710, Mar. 2022. doi: 10.3389/fped.2022.840710