Title: MALOQ: Massively Accelerated Learning of Operators for Quantum Transport

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.28911v1

Published Time: Tue, 30 Jun 2026 00:43:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# MALOQ : Massively Accelerated Learning of 

# Operators for Quantum Transport 

Manasa Kaniselvan , Alexander Maeder , Denghui Lu , Alexandros Nikolaos Ziogas , Mathieu Luisier 

D-ITET, ETH Zurich , Zurich, Switzerland 

{mkaniselvan, almaeder, denghuilu, alziogas, mluisier }@iis.ee.ethz.ch 

Abstract —Machine-learned (ML) operator models can be trained to predict density functional theory (DFT) Hamilto-nian/density matrices at significantly reduced computational cost, thus extending electronic-structure calculations to previously unfeasible scales. Here, we introduce MALOQ (Massively Acceler-ated Learning of Operators for Quantum Transport), an applica-tion built to train on and predict electronic-structure matrices for systems made of few to 100k atoms, described by large basis sets, and covering a wide range of atomic elements. Based on a state-of-the-art, SO(2)-equivariant backbone architecture, MALOQ provides (i) custom data-processing kernels to handle high-rank Hamiltonian matrix data and (ii) a scalable edge-wise distribution of atomic graph(s). Trained on the largest molecular Hamiltonian datasets available today, it reduces time-per-epoch by over 30% compared to a molecule-wise-distributed framework, and enables inference on material graphs of arbitrary size. We demonstrate scalable training and inference for 3,000-12,000 atoms on the Alps supercomputer, up to 192 GPUs and 256 GPUs, respectively. 

Index Terms —Materials science, electronic structure, density functional theory, distributed graph neural networks 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Machine-learned (ML) models are accelerating computa-tional materials science research by extending the reach of atomistic simulations to previously infeasible scales [1]. So far, these models have focused on learning properties at the molecular and atomic level. This includes the class of ML Interatomic Potentials (MLIPs), which predict the molecular energies and atomic forces used in molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. State-of-the-art, graph-based ‘materials founda-tion models’ are now capable of generating these quantities for arbitrary molecules and complex material geometries at quasi-DFT-level accuracy [2], [3], [4]. An emerging class of ML materials models extends these architectures toward electronic-level quantities, defined by 

operators [5], [6], [7], [8]. Rather than learning atom-centered properties, these ‘operator models’ are directly trained on the matrices encoding interactions between the inter- and intra-atomic orbitals of a given system. The most commonly tar-geted operators are the Hamiltonian/Fock ( H) and density ( P)matrices, which describe the spatial and energetic distribution of states that electrons can occupy within the atomic structure considered. Recent works have extended these principles to learn other operators that can be represented in an atomic orbital basis, either directly, such as the Green’s function (inverse of H) [9], or indirectly, e.g., lower-rank Hessian [10] matrices which are derived from forces. Operator models are being developed for two main purposes: 1) Enabling quantum transport through complex ma-terials: The Hamiltonian in matrix form serves as an input to quantum transport (QT) simulations that aim to compute the electronic current flowing through atomically-resolved devices under different voltage configurations. Advanced QT solvers operate on electronic structure inputs at the level of density functional theory (DFT), one of the most powerful ab initio methods for electronic structure calculations [11]. Currently, QT codes are capable of treating systems with 10k+ atoms, in the presence of complex many-body effects [12], matching the physical dimensions of electronic devices fabricated by semicon-ductor companies [13]. However, generating H using DFT codes scales with O(N 3

> orb

), Norb being the total number of atomic orbitals in the structure of interest, ultimately limiting the problem sizes (number of atoms) that can be handled. Existing works typically compute H for small, periodic systems and tile them to construct device-scale models. Meanwhile, these operator models can generate 

H with O(Norb ) scalability [14]. In the same way that MLIPs have enabled new regimes of MD simulations, operator models thus promise to unlock QT modeling of realistically complex atomic geometries [15]. 2) Exploiting scaling laws for downstream properties: 

ML property models are data-limited - their performance improves with more training data [3]. However, the forces and energies in existing training datasets have already consumed billions of core hours to be assembled at the DFT level [16], and generating orders-of-magnitude more data is not presently feasible. Within these datasets, the processing of each molecule or material unit cell of N

atoms generates O(1) energy labels, O(N ) force labels, and O(N 2) orbital interaction labels in the electronic structure operators. Leveraging the latter available but so-far-ignored electronic data through pre-training schemes provides an efficient route to continue exploiting ‘neu-ral scaling laws,’ which define the relationship between training dataset size and model accuracy. In DFT, the orbital interactions within electronic structure operators parameterize all subsequent atomic-level molecular and material properties. Incorporating this information into 

property prediction architectures improves generalization on atomic- and molecular-prediction tasks [10], [6], [17], [18], [7]. Small molecule benchmarks have shown that 

> arXiv:2606.28911v1 [cs.LG] 27 Jun 2026

Fig. 1: Applications of electronic structure learning in molecules (top) and materials (bottom). The goal is to learn the mapping between atomic structures (left) and their corresponding electronic Hamiltonian matrices (middle), and predict them at scales inaccessible by DFT alone. From these matrices, we can analytically construct electron densities or compute the electronic current flowing through complex materials (right). computing forces and energies analytically from learned electronic structure operators leads to accuracy competitive with direct predictions using MLIPs [19]. Sizable datasets of electronic structure matrices have re-cently become available, with up to 10 PB [16] of orbital interactions. Training on this matrix data, however, introduces a different set of computational challenges than previously encountered by ML property models such as MLIPs. First, the spherical features used within embeddings must match the dimensions of high-rank orbital interaction data, typically up to f (and sometimes g) orbitals (requiring angular degree 

l = 6 −8). Contrary to MLIPs where the rank of the maximum spherical coefficients is typically a hyperparameter, electronic structure prediction requires high-rank embeddings simply to produce data of correct dimensions. Secondly, while MLIPs typically enforce cutoffs of ∼6-8 ˚A between interacting atoms, treating orbital interaction data requires handling ded-icated edge embeddings that extend to interatomic distances of 12 ˚A [15], [6]. Larger cutoffs create densely connected graph representations with node degrees over 100, significantly increasing the total volume of embeddings to be processed. Fi-nally, processing orbital interaction data necessitates frequent basis transformations during training and inference to convert between ‘label’ and ‘matrix’ representations of H. Together, these three key differences substantially increase the memory footprint of both training and inference. To enable operator prediction ‘at scale’, we therefore introduce the MALOQ (Massively Accelerated Learning of 

Operators for Quantum Transport) package, an accelerated ML framework to train electronic structure matrices and predict them for arbitrary atomic elements and structure sizes, from large molecules to 10k+ atom material systems ( Fig. 1 ). At the core of MALOQ is a message passing Graph Neural Network (GNN) leveraging equivariant spherical channel net-work (eSCN) convolutions [20]. Its backbone architecture has achieved state-of-the-art performance for both MLIPs (eSEN [21]) and Hamiltonian prediction tasks (HELM [6]). On top of it, we introduce two categories of computational innovations designed to enable massively parallel training and inference of electronic structure matrices: 1) Operator data processing acceleration: (1a) Efficient ‘Ma-trix ↔ Label’ conversions kernels, allowing for Hamilto-nian matrices to be pre-processed into training labels at 

∼ 10 6 atoms/s, and rapidly reconstructed from predicted spherical coefficients. (1b) Accelerated computation of the generalized rotation matrices (Wigner-D matrices) required for eSCN convolutions. 2) Custom distribution of large molecular and material atomic graphs to accelerate training over molecular datasets, and perform inference for the H of large atomic systems. We combine an efficient point-to-point commu-nication scheme with edge-wise partitioning to minimize communication and reduce load imbalance between par-titions, achieving strong scaling up to 192 GH200 GPUs, and > 90% weak scaling efficiency on structure sizes of 12,000 atoms ( ∼10 million orbital interactions). Together, these contributions enable us to (1) improve training speeds over irregular molecular databases by 30-50%, and (2) achieve rapid inference for Hamiltonian matrices on large material graphs containing 10k+ atoms. On the one hand, our work allows for the simulation of industry-relevant atomic systems whose quantum transport properties can now be read-ily determined at the DFT level with reduced computational complexity. On the other hand, it enables an efficient treatment of the tremendous volume of molecular and material property data available at electronic resolution, creating an avenue for ML property models to continue benefiting from neural scaling laws without additional dataset generation. II. B ACKGROUND & R ELATED WORK 

A. The electronic structure problem 

The training data for MLIPs and other property models is typically generated using DFT. This first principle method implements the Kohn-Sham equations, which self-consistently couple the electron density and electrostatic potential of the atomic system of interest until convergence is reached, after Niter iterations [22]. Several commercially or freely available codes implement this self-consistent and iterative “density ↔potential” scheme on atomic structures [23], [24]. Many of these implementations operate in a basis of local-ized atomic orbitals |φi⟩, often constructed from contracted Gaussian functions [23], [24] that transform like spherical harmonics ( Y lm(ˆ r′)) under rotation. Each spherical harmonic is specified by an angular momentum degree l and order 

m ∈ {− l, . . . , l }, e.g., s(l = 0) , p(l = 1) , d(l = 2) , · · · .In this basis, the Kohn-Sham equations take the form of a generalized eigenvalue problem: Hψ = εSψ. The Hamiltonian matrix H has entries Hij = ⟨φi| ˆH(r)|φj ⟩ where ˆH(r) is the Hamiltonian operator. The overlap matrix S is made of terms Sij = ⟨φi|φj ⟩ that describe finite overlaps between the localized orbitals. They can be pre-computed from the orbital basis. Both H and S are matrices of size Norb =PNA 

> k=1

Norb,k , where NA is the total number of atoms, Norb,k 

the number of orbitals (basis elements) of atom k, and the index k runs over all atoms accounted for. The solution of the Kohn-Sham equations provides the energy eigenvalues ( ε) and wavefunctions ( ψ) from which the charge density ρ(r) can be derived. The core operation within DFT codes then consists of repeatedly solving the aforementioned generalized eigenvalue problem, until self-consistent convergence is reached between 

ρ(r) and the resulting electrostatic potential V (r). The compu-tational complexity of the full method scales with O(N 3

> orb

) per iteration. At the end of these self-consistent iterations, atomic-and molecular-level properties, such as forces and energies, can be computed from the final, converged H.

B. Related work 

GNNs are now mainstream in computational materials sci-ence, where they are used to learn structure-property rela-tionships on atomic graphs. Training occurs through message passing, where nodes and/or edges of the graph are updated as a learnable function of other nodes/edges (typically atomic elements/interatomic distance) from their neighborhoods. Suc-cessive message passing (MP) layers gradually transform the initial identity of each node/edge such that they can be mapped to targets representing material properties. The success of many GNNs in learning structure-property relationships hinges on preserving the structural symmetries of the input atomic graphs. Graph-based architectures, per se , ensure permutation and translation invariance of atomic coordinates. Imposing interactions cutoffs allows models to further take advantage of the physical nearsightedness of                                                                    

> Application Op. Task Prediction Distr. NA(Lmax )
> Node Edge
> MLIPs
> 
> DeepMD [25] Linear F/E ✓✗✓-Allegro [26] TP F/E ✓✗✓-MACE [2] TP F/E ✓✗✗-SevenNet [27] TP F/E ✓✗✓-UMA [3] eSCN F/E ✓✗✓-
> Hamiltonians  
> QHNet [28] TP Hij ✓✓✗10 (4) WANet [8] eSCN Hij ✓✓✗100 (6) HELM [6] eSCN Hij ✓✓✗150 (6) DeepH [29] eSCN Hij ✓✓✗216 (4)
> MALOQ eSCN Hij ✓✓✓3,000+ (4-8)

TABLE I: Selection of GNN applications for materials model-ing across atomic elements (near-‘universal’), including func-tional similarities and differences in the prediction tasks, oper-ation (Op.) used to update node/edge features, and possibility of distributed compute environment (Distr). F/E = Forces & Energies, Hij = Hamiltonian, TP = SO(3) equivariant tensor product, eSCN = SO(2) equivariant spherical channel network. 

NA = Maximum training structure size. atomic-interactions. Rotational symmetries have been incor-porated by explicitly designing the GNNs to commute with rotation operations, typically by using tensor products and gated activations in place of linear layers and nonlinear activa-tion functions. Compared to otherwise ‘rotationally invariant’ networks, which depend on data-augmentation to learn these relationships, the ‘rotationally equivariant’ models considered here learn physically-meaningful mappings with less data [30] and lower compute budgets [31]. While models without en-coded rotational symmetries can perform competitively when trained on sufficient property data [4], for operators such as electronic structure matrices, the data explicitly takes the form of high-rank embeddings, making incorporation of rotational symmetries unavoidable for sufficient accuracy [6], [8]. We present key features of state-of-the-art GNNs for MLIP and Hamiltonian prediction in Table I , and compare them to MALOQ. Note that GNNs targeting MLIPs are restricted to ‘node’ prediction tasks, while those dedicated to Hamilto-nian matrices must also include ‘edge’ prediction capabilities. For all models performing electronic structure prediction, we include the maximum system sizes they have so far been reported to achieve. Two aspects in Table I are particularly relevant to our work, (1) the development of models spe-cific to Hamiltonian prediction and (2) domain decomposi-tion/distribution over the underlying atomic graphs. Below, we discuss their progression and current state of the art. 

1) Hamiltonian prediction models : Models which train/predict Hamiltonian matrices were initially constrained to small-size systems, with most existing implementations treating small-molecule datasets such as MD17 [35] and QH9 [33], or periodic materials datasets which are described by small, repeated unit cells [36]. In these cases, rotational equivariance was satisfied by using tensor products that mix features [5], [28]. However, tensor product operations scale poorly with Lmax , the maximum angular momentum degree Dataset Elements Ntotal atom Navg atom davg node Basis (Lmax ) Func. rcut ( ˚ A)                                                          

> Small molecule MD17 H, C, N, O --(FC) def2 SVP ( 4)PBE (FC) QH9 H, C, N, O, F --(FC) def2 SVP ( 4)B3LYP (FC)
> ∇2DFT (2k split) H, C, N, O, F, S, Cl, Br 938,920 77 (FC) def2 SVP ( 4)ωB97X-D (FC) Large Molecule CSH 58k ×58 elements ---def2-TZVPD ( 6)ωB97M-V 12.0
> Electrolytes ×19 elements 1,201,369 41 48 def2-TZVPD ( 6)ωB97M-V 12.0
> Metal-Organics ×31 elements 1,064,625 75 79 def2-TZVPD ( 8)ωB97M-V 12.0 Material Amorphous-HfO 2Hf, O 9,000 3,000 598 SZV/DZVP ( 4)PBE 12.0 Amorphous-GST Ge, Sb, Te ---DZVP ( 4)PBE 12.0

TABLE II: Summary of existing public Hamiltonian matrix datasets, highlighting the distribution of structure size (# atoms, 

Ntotal atom , Naverage atom ), node degree ( dnode ), basis set and Lmax required to describe it, functional type (Func.), and interaction cutoff radius. ‘FC’ means ‘fully connected graph’, in case molecules are small enough to avoid applying a cutoff. Data sources: MD17 [32], QH9 [33], ∇2DFT [34], amorphous materials [15], electronic structure subsets from OMol25 [16], [6]. of the spherical harmonic basis kept in the model, O(L6

> max

)

when dense, and O(L5

> max

) when leveraging sparsity in the tensor coefficients [37]. Despite significant acceleration with dedicated libraries [38], the computational complexity of tensor products explode when treating orbital interactions of 

Lmax ≥ 4, as typically encountered in electronic structure matrices. Hamiltonian prediction architectures capable of treating systems beyond small molecules have thus taken a different route: They use eSCN convolutions to mix features. By relaxing strict parity equivariance and implementing local bond rotations to reduce the dimensionality of the spherical interactions from SO(3) to SO(2), eSCN-based models enable rotationally equivariant operations built from linear layers, and thus scale with O(L3

> max

) [20]. Currently, all Hamiltonian prediction models capable of treating structures with 100+ atoms rely on this approach [8], [15], [6], [39]. A few of these models have recently been trained on ‘universal’ datasets, making them capable of predicting orbital interactions across a wide range of atomic elements [8], [6]. Elsewhere, the scalability of eSCN convolutions has also been leveraged for force/energy prediction, and serves as the backbone operation behind models such as the ‘Universal Model for Atoms’ (UMA) [3]. We note that there exists a class of electronic structure pre-diction models targeting ‘effective’ or ‘empirical tight-binding’ Hamiltonians rather than ab initio ones at the DFT-level [40], [41]. These models typically scale to much larger system sizes, but at the expense of the structural and compositional universality made possible by a DFT-level basis. 

2) Domain decomposition/distribution : The vast majority of distributed GNN applications in materials science are con-cerned with MLIPs. Many of them, e.g., DeepMD [25] and Allegro [26], leverage the domain decomposition functionality of the LAMMPS molecular dynamics code [42]. LAMMPS re-lies on spatial decomposition of the domain into boxes, and has an additional functionality to modify the box-boundaries and balance the number of atoms within each box. During message passing iterations, ghost atoms are communicated through halo nodes/edges at the boundaries to aggregate messages onto each node. The communicated volume is determined by the connectivity of the graph, densely connected graphs incurring high communication overhead as ghost atoms must send messages across multiple layers. Directly partitioning the graph instead of the spatial domain appears as a promising approach to improve load balancing and more evenly distribute communication. This is the ap-proach pursued by SevenNet [27], [30] and DistMLIP [43], which serve as wrappers for existing MLIP architectures. SevenNet is integrated into LAMMPS, and its strong scaling abilities are primarily limited by reduced GPU utilization when distributed over many GPUs. DistMLIP [43] supports multi-GPU (but single-node) inference. The distribution in these applications generally occurs only over nodes (atoms) and not over edges, making them less suitable to Hamiltonian prediction models, where the number of graph edges far exceeds that of nodes. 

C. Hamiltonian Matrix Datasets 

All DFT-level datasets available today have necessitated at least one electronic-structure calculation per atomic system considered, but almost none of them stored the correspond-ing Hamiltonian matrices. In Table II we summarize the parameters of several datasets that indeed include Hamiltonian matrices. Note that the nature of the atomic elements as well as the DFT features (functional, localized basis set) do not change the computational problem at hand, but heavier elements typically require a larger basis, thus determining Lmax . To benchmark the computational performance of MALOQ when training on large-scale electronic structure matrix data, we use data from the three representative datasets in bold in 

Table II : (1) ∇2DFT and its drug-like molecules with up to 50 atoms each, (2) custom ‘unsolvated electrolytes’ and ‘metal organics’ datasets derived from the Open Molecules 2025 4 million data with basis-dependent Lmax [16], and (3) the 3,000-atom/structure amorphous HfO 2 dataset released by Ref. [15]. III. I MPLEMENTATION AND OPTIMIZATION 

MALOQ is an ML model for scalable prediction of electronic-structure operators, e.g., Hamiltonian and density matrices (rank-N ), as well as general operator-valued quan-tities in materials modeling, such as Hessians (rank-2). We illustrate the stages of MALOQ’s internal workflow during inference in Fig. 2(a) . Overall, it consists of two components: a learnable ML model that learns mappings from atomic struc-ture to spherical tensors, and ‘non-learnable’ data-processing pipelines. The first ‘non-learnable’ step, labeled ‘Compute Wigners’, creates generalized rotation (Wigner-D) matrices which rotate all edges of the atomic graph to a common ( +y) axis. These precomputed rotation matrices are then used within the second, learnable component of the model: the eSCN convolutions in each message passing layer. By rotating the embeddings of each node to a common axis before they interact, eSCN convolutions reduce the dimensionality of the ‘tensor product’ between them from SO(3) to SO(2). The learnable interaction can then be applied through a set of constrained linear layers while preserving rotational equivariance, following a reference implementation first introduced in Ref. [20]. Finally, the directed ‘messages’ created by interacting nodes along each graph edge are either aggregated onto their target nodes (in the Node blocks) or used directly to update the embeddings of edges (in the Edge blocks). At the end of the message passing operations, each node or edge of the atomic graph is described by an embedding which has been processed through three layers of learnable eSCN convolutions. At this point, the final ‘non-learnable’ component of MALOQ (’Label →Matrix in Fig. 2(a) ) uses these predicted ‘Labels’ to reconstruct the Hamiltonian in matrix representation. Note that during training, the opposite transformation is applied to the Hamiltonian matrices within the training dataset: ’Matrix →Label performs basis transfor-mations between the original, matrix representation of H,and a set of labels which can be mapped to/learned by the individual nodes and edges of a GNN corresponding to the atomic structure of interest. The non-learnable ‘data pipelines’ within MALOQ have been accelerated through custom kernels that enable process-ing (training) over large dataset batches and inference for large system sizes. These large data volumes naturally exceed GPU memory constraints, necessitating a graph-level paral-lelization to process the corresponding embeddings through layers of eSCN convolutions. We thus additionally introduce a distributed-graph implementation which efficiently communi-cates embeddings across multiple processes, and illustrate par-titioning strategies that reduce load imbalance across batches of molecules with diverse size, and large, single-materials graphs. Together, these computational contributions enable both rapid, scalable operator prediction, bringing the accuracy of MALOQ’s backbone architecture [6] to 10k+ atom systems. In this section, we detail each of these components, start-ing with the methods behind them, associated computational 

Fig. 2: Custom kernels for data processing and matrix reconstruction (a) Schematic of the different steps along the inference process, highlighting (in blue boxes) the two non-learnable model components and in black frame the location where the ‘Matrix →Label’ conversion occurs. (b) Illustration showing the mapping between the matrix and label represen-tations of data for a toy H 2O molecule with a minimal basis (Oxygen: s, p, Hydrogen: s), so that Lmax =2. The labels for each node/edge are populated with diagonal/off-diagonal sub-matrices. Measured processing throughput/runtime to either (c) convert multiple matrices to labels, or (d) reconstruct a single matrix from a given set of predicted data. All measurements were taken over a subset of molecules present in the ∇2DFT (Lmax =4) and OMol Electrolytes/Metal-Organics ( Lmax =6/8) datasets, with data processed in fp32. challenges, and how they are optimized within the MALOQ code. We close each subsection with a brief evaluation of the computational improvements achieved. 

A. Training Environment 

We first introduce our experimental setup. Our models are trained on the Alps supercomputer at CSCS, where each node comprises 4 NVIDIA GH200 Grace Hopper superchips [44]. Every superchip combines a Hopper GPU with 132 Streaming Multiprocessors and 96 GB HBM3 memory with a Grace CPU with 72 cores and 128 GB LPDDR5. Each Hopper GPU is connected to every other GPU within the same node via NVLink and 150 GB/s bidirectional point-to-point bandwidth, resulting in a total of 900 GB/s. The Alps nodes are connected via an HPE Slingshot 11 network with a Dragonfly topology. MALOQ is written in PyTorch [45], using torch tensors to represent the embeddings of nodes and edges. To communicate embeddings between GPUs, we use PyTorch’s distributed functionality and its NVIDIA Collective Communications Li-brary (NCCL) backend. 

B. Data pipelines: Matrix ↔ Label conversions 1) Methods : The entries of H correspond to interactions between electronic orbitals located on the same or on different atoms. The full matrix can be decomposed into sub-matrices 

Hαβ ij = ⟨lα, m α| H |lβ , m β ⟩. They contain all interactions 

Hαβ ij (mα, m β ) between spherical harmonic basis functions 

lα (of degree α) on atom i, and lβ (of degree β) on j, as illustrated in the left part of Fig. 2(b) . Mathematically, each 

Hαβ ij corresponds to the tensor product lα ⊗ lβ , which has length (2 lα + 1) × (2 lβ + 1) . Through a transformation T ,this tensor product can be written as the direct sum ( ⊕) of angular momentum eigenstates |L, M ⟩, where L ranges from degree |α − β| to |α + β|, i.e., T (lα ⊗ lβ ) = L(α+β) 

> i=|α−β|

Li =

L|α−β| ⊕ ... ⊕ L(α+β). The transformation T involves a matrix of Clebsch-Gordon (CG) coefficients. The entries for a specific 

|L, M ⟩ component are given by: 

|L, M ⟩ =

> +lα

X

> mα=−lα
> +lβ

X 

> mβ=−lβ

C(L,M )(lα,m α)( lβ ,m β ) |lα, m α⟩ | lβ , m β ⟩ .

(1) Here, C(L,M )(lα,m α)( lβ ,m β ) is the CG coefficient describing the contribution of |lα, m α⟩ | lβ , m β ⟩ to the state |L, M ⟩, and 

|lα, m α⟩ | lβ , m β ⟩ corresponds to Hαβ ij (mα, m β ). The transfor-mation T thus decomposes the Hamiltonian sub-matrix Hαβ ij 

into a ‘vector’ form, representing a direct sum of tensors with different angular degree l. All |L, M ⟩ corresponding to a single 

Hij block are then concatenated into a vector hij . The same operation is repeated for all blocks of H. Since not all atomic elements require the same number of orbitals (basis set) to be accurately described, the resulting hij vectors have different lengths. They are all padded to a common dimension, that of the largest element in the dataset. The collection of all padded hij forms the ‘labels’ used to train the node and edge embeddings of the GNN (right part of Fig. 2(b) ), and the loss is computed element-wise over the model’s prediction of them. The maximum degree of the hij becomes the Lmax required for embeddings. 

2) Optimization : To process a dataset of Hamiltonian ma-trices, we need to (1) extract the individual orbital interaction blocks into equally-shaped buffers and (2) perform a basis transformation to convert them into labels using Eq. (1). While the matrix operations within the basis transformation step can be done efficiently using PyTorch tensors, the coefficient extraction in Fig. 2(b) rapidly becomes a bottleneck for larger training datasets or inference system sizes. We introduce a dedicated CUDA kernel to handle the transformations between batches of (or single) matrices and labels. Within this kernel, each thread processes a single matrix element, i.e., orbital-orbital interaction block, and each thread block processes one node ( Hαβ ii ) or edge ( Hαβ ij ). The kernel uses an ‘orbital template’ T (Zi, Z j ) containing the row and column slices of Hij corresponding to the set of orbitals interaction between atom i of atomic element Zi and atom j

of atomic element Zj . This information can be precomputed for a given basis. As the size of the labels differs for each dataset, we bench-mark our kernel on a selection of three molecular datasets in Table II , each with different Lmax and orbital basis. To evaluate the performance under realistic conditions, we consider two different scenarios: (i) data processing (forward transformation, pre-training) and (ii) matrix reconstruction (backward transformation, post-inference). First, Fig. 2(c) re-ports the ‘data processing’ case (‘Matrices → Labels’), where multiple Hamiltonian matrices H are converted into orbital interaction labels h for supervised learning. We evaluate processing throughput by considering increasing fractions of each of the three datasets, resulting in increased total # atoms. Processing throughput between 7.3 ×10 5 and 1.2 ×10 6 atoms/s are measured, allowing us to process the largest molecular datasets of 110M structures [16] ( ∼50 atoms/structure) for training in under an hour, on a single process. Note that for 

Lmax = 8 , the data exceeds the memory of a single GH200 GPU before peak processing throughput can be reached. We therefore report the maximum value attained. Secondly, in Fig. 2(d) , the ‘matrix reconstruction‘ case is presented (‘Labels → Matrix’, h → H). At the end of the inference step, the model generates orbital interaction labels h for a given atomic structure, which are then re-assembled into the 

H for downstream applications. Here, the difference in runtime stems primarily from the number of elements per label ( Lmax ), but remains under 10 ms across a range of system sizes. Note that the variability in measured time/throughput at the same # atoms can be attributed to different molecular connectivity (# edges per atomic graph). 

C. Data pipelines: Accelerated Wigner-D matrix generation 1) Methods : We now turn to the Wigner-D matrix block in Fig. 3(a) . For a given input atomic graph, MALOQ first pre-computes the set of generalized rotation matrices R that rotate the graph edges ( eij ) to a common ( +y) axis ( Fig. 3(b), top ). As in many equivariant GNNs for materials science, the embeddings of every node ( ni) and edge ( eij ) often take the structure of spherical harmonic coefficients of rank 

L = 0 ...L max . Each L-coefficient is expanded into E channels - the dimensions of every node ( ni) and edge ( eij ) embedding processed is thus (Lmax + 1) 2 × E. Performing a rotation 

R of the original atomic system ˆr into ˆr′ = R · ˆr (where 

ˆr/ˆr′ are normalized direction vectors) requires the embeddings 

ni/eij to be multiplied by a direct sum of ‘Wigner-D’ matrix 

DL(R) of degree L., i.e., n′

> i

/e′ 

> ij

= LLmax  

> l=0

Dl(R) × ni/elij .The lower part of Fig. 3(b) illustrates the block-diagonal structure of these Wigner-D matrices which rotate the corre-sponding embeddings ni/eij . Practically, creating the Wigner-D matrices involves (1) computing a set of Euler angles α, β, γ 

corresponding to each edge in a given atomic graph, and then (2) using them to determine the (2 L+1 ) × (2L+1) entries of 

DL(R).Fig. 3: Fused Triton kernel for Wigner-D matrix con-struction. (a) Schematic of the inference process highlighting the location where rotations occur in the MALOQ application (blue box with thick black frame). (b) These Wigner-D ma-trices rotate the node/edge embedding ni/e ij of every edge 

ˆrij from the atomic graph to align it with the +y-axis. (c) Doing this requires first computing the Euler angles ( α, β, γ )of the rotation from edge vectors ˆrij , and then constructing 

D(ℓ) via four tl.dot operations, which we encapsulate into a fused Triton kernel. (d) Block-packing strategy for matrix product (Triton tl.dot): ℓ-blocks are packed into 16 ×16 tiles (or 32 ×32 for ℓ=8 ) to maximize tensor core utilization. (e) Latency comparison between our Triton kernel and the Torch implementation at selected number of input edges. 

2) Optimization : A reference PyTorch implementation is provided by the e3nn library [46], which computes each 

D(R)L submatrix separately, but for all graph edges in a batch. Each sub-computation involves a chain of four small matrix multiplications, executed via separate kernel launches, materializing the intermediate results in GPU global memory. Thus, a significant speedup can be gained by developing a fused kernel to perform the full ˆrij → D(R)L operation chain for every graph edge ˆrij and orbital degree l (Fig. 3(c) ), vastly increasing arithmetic intensity. This kernel, which we imple-ment in Triton, (1) fuses the calculation of Euler angles and of all matrix products that are required to obtain the Wigner-D sub-matrices for every degree L...L max , and (2) implements a block-packing strategy to group different Ls ( Fig. 3(d) ). For the latter, we take advantage of the regular angular dimensions of each L, which are fixed by the underlying physics: The size of each sub-matrix Dl is (2 l+1) ×(2l+1), to account for the coefficients m = −l... + l for a spherical harmonic of degree 

l. As the matrix product in Triton (tl.dot) uses fixed shapes (e.g., 16 ×16, 32 ×32...), packing the sub-matrices for multiple 

L-components together minimizes padding overhead and fully utilizes the fixed-size tiles. We benchmark the reference PyTorch and our Triton imple-mentations with three different Lmax values, corresponding to selected datasets from Table II . The results are presented in 

Fig. 3(e) . At smaller data sizes (number of edges, and Lmax ), the execution time in the PyTorch reference implementation is dominated by kernel launch overhead from multiple matrix products. In this range, our Triton code shows speedups of ∼500 × (100-1K edges) to ∼50 × (10K edges), as the launching overhead was removed through kernel fusion. At higher data volumes (100K+ edges), the reference implemen-tation becomes limited by global memory traffic. Still, our Triton implementation achieves a ∼5-6 × speedup from the combination of kernel fusion and L-wise block packing. 

D. Graph level distribution 

At the start of each MP layer (indicated with black frames in 

Fig. 4(a) ), a set of messages mi→j , consisting of the concate-nated node embeddings ni ⊕ nj , are assembled. Figure 4(b) 

illustrates this process for a fully-connected toy molecule of 3 atoms, picturing the construction of each of the 6 messages required. This set of messages undergoes eSCN convolutions, which mix the features of ni and nj , and are then either aggregated onto node j (node update) or used to update the edge embedding eij (edge update). In a distributed-memory setting, constructing these messages requires communication of node embeddings across graph partitions. Our implementa-tion uses PyTorch’s distributed NCCL backend and aggregates the communication required between any two processes as follows: Each process (1) packs its own ni into a separate send buffer for every one of its neighbors ( j), (2) sends/receives those buffers using point-to-point communication, and (3) unpacks the received ni and inserts them into its message tensors. This communication scheme is visualized in Fig. 4(c) ,where a process (Rank 2) packs and sends its local ni required by its neighbors (Ranks 0 and 1), which receive and insert them into their mi→j . During the backward pass, the reverse communication pattern is executed, implemented as a custom function in PyTorch. In addition, we make several design choices to further refine the communication step. First, we adopt a target-nodes-own-edges distribution policy: Each rank owns the edges eij where the connected node j is local, eliminating additional inter-process communication during the edge update phase. In addi-tion, we partially hide communication latency by overlapping the indexing of local nodes into message tensors with the asynchronous transfer of remote node embeddings. To that end, we partition the list of local node embeddings such that those requiring transmission to remote ranks are contiguous in memory, as shown for Rank 2 in Fig. 4(c) .Fig. 4: Custom communication scheme for graph-level distribution. (a) Schematic of the inference process showing where the communication occurs within MALOQ, i.e., at the start of each node/edge block within a eSCN convolution layer (black frames). (b) Illustration of the communication pattern required to assemble the messages mi→j within a toy H 2O molecule. (c) Illustration of the send/recv operation implementation to communicate node embeddings from Rank 2 to Ranks 0 and 1 for the example partitioned graph pictured in the inset. The arrows indicate the edges starting from nodes belonging to Rank 2’s partition and ending in one of the other partitions: 4 (5) Rank 2’s nodes are connected to Rank 0 (1)’s nodes through inter-partition edges. The corresponding data is first copied to a buffer before being sent to the targeted Rank. There, it is unpacked into a local message buffer. The remaining objective is to partition the graph in order to evenly distribute the workload and reduce communication time. In the following, we discuss and compare the different graph partitioning approaches implemented in MALOQ for applications across molecules and materials. 

1) Partitioning molecular datasets : Training on molec-ular datasets in a distributed-memory environment typically involves creating a molecule-wise partition, where each rank processes a subset of molecules. Load imbalance might arise if these molecules are made of a wide range of atoms, which may contain an even wider distribution of connectivity (# edges per structure). This load imbalance can be reduced by 

Fig. 5: Training runtime comparison under different dis-tribution schemes. (a) Dataset used for training. It consists of 128 randomly-selected molecules from the OMol electrolytes dataset and their corresponding H. (b) Workload distribution across ranks quantified in # atoms and # edges, for three different distribution schemes (atom-wise, edge-wise, Metis), compared to the undistributed case in which 128 molecules are divided across 32 ranks (molecule-wise). (c) Forward and (d) backward pass time distribution across different ranks. Each data is the median of 200 training epochs, of which the first 20 are discarded. The vertical dashed lines indicate the maximum time for each distribution scheme. 

Fig. 6: Embedding communication and processing through-put . (a) Measured intra-/inter-node communication throughput of node embeddings ni with embedding size E=128. (b) Processing throughput for eSCN convolutions as a function of the number of messages mi→j for different Lmax . Each data point corresponds to the median of 20 measurements. ‘binning’ molecules into partitions to balance the total number of atoms/edges across the structures handled by each process. However, a finer load balance can be achieved by partitioning the molecules at the atom/edge level. In practice, this can significantly reduce the time to process each training batch. As an example, we consider in Fig. 5 a batch of 128 molecules from the OMol-electrolytes dataset (Fig. 5(a) )and compare the workload distribution ( Fig. 5(b) ), as well as the runtime per forward ( Fig. 5(c) ) and backward pass (Fig. 5(d) ) under four different partitioning schemes. The Fig. 7: Strong scaling of MALOQ over three irregular molecular datasets from Table II with different Lmax . (a) Forward pass. (b) Backward pass. (c) Total time per batch. A total of 128 molecules from each dataset is placed in each batch, which is distributed according to an edge-wise partition. The data plotted is the median over 200 epochs (the first 20 are discarded), and the shaded areas show variance over runtime across ranks. Each data point is annotated by the average number of edges owned by each process under that distribution, to compare with the saturation of embedding processing throughput measured in Fig. 6 . Note that we start from the minimum number of GPUs allowing for the partitioned batch to fit in memory. so-called ‘Metis’ approach uses the METIS package [47] to search for a mincut solution to the partitioning problem. Since cuts to the graph are penalized, Metis finds an ‘op-timal binning’ when there are more molecules than ranks, thus balancing the partitions without introducing inter-process communication. This is the case in Fig. 5(b) . Meanwhile, in the ‘atom-wise’/‘edge-wise’ partitions, nodes/edges are evenly distributed among ranks, starting from a list of atoms across the data batch where those within each molecule are con-tiguous. In particular, an edge-wise distribution of the graph leads to a highly balanced embedding workload. Compared to the molecule-wise distribution, splitting the batch edge-wise reduces the time per forward pass by 30% (from 0.23 to 0.15s), and the time per backwards pass by over 50% (0.85 to 0.4s), despite the introduction of inter-process communication. 

2) Partitioning large materials graphs : In case of large atomic structures, the corresponding materials graph must be distributed over multiple processes. The resulting communi-cation involves only a few embeddings exchanged between any two ranks, and is eventually limited entirely by overhead. To highlight this effect, we show in Fig. 6(a) the time to send/receive different counts of ni between two processes, each running on a separate GH200 superchip on Alps. Up to about 100 ni (considering E = 128 channels and Lmax = 4 ), communication is bound by latency. At the same time, the achievable runtime improvements due to graph distribution are limited by processing throughput, which decreases once each partition owns too few local edges. The number of messages required to saturate processing throughput is shown in Fig. 6(b) . It is proportional to the number of local edges. To minimize the number of partition neighbors and data exchanges in large materials graphs (and thus the latency), we introduce an additional partitioning method based on recursive bisection. Our ‘modified recursive bisection’ scheme recur-sively distributes a graph among 2 n ranks while maintaining edge-wise balanced partitions, accounting for 3-D periodicity used in DFT calculations of materials, and minimizing the number of new neighbors introduced by each local cut. Start-ing from standard recursive bisection, we make the following changes: (1) The dimension along which to cut is determined based on ‘which dimension would create the fewest additional neighboring partitions when cut’, considering both (a) the interaction cutoff radius rcut and (b) periodicity of the 3-D domain. (2) Each sub-domain, at any stage of the algorithm, is partitioned so that the total node degree (N D ), which we use as a proxy for the number of edges, remains balanced between the two newly formed partitions. IV. A PPLICATIONS 

MALOQ is designed to (1) improve parallel efficiency (time per epoch) when training on massive (terabyte-scale) Hamiltonian matrix datasets and (2) rapidly infer electronic structure matrices for materials at scale. In this section, we present performance benchmarks for real training scenarios under both operating conditions, using the datasets from Table II . These benchmarks are specific to the hardware discussed in Section III-A - other architectures with different memory constraints are likely to show different scaling performance. 

A. Scalable training over large molecular datasets 

‘Universal’ molecular datasets with diverse atomic elements typically necessitate large batch sizes during training, to ensure sufficient sampling over all of the represented elements within each batch. We thus standardize all our benchmarks using a single batch size of 128 randomly selected molecules, which is distributed across multiple processes. In all cases, we use an edge-wise partitioning, as previously explored in Fig. 5 . Note that tackling the largest molecules (in terms of # atoms, Lmax )across these datasets already requires partitioning individual molecular graphs to fit in GPU memory. The strong scaling results for the training runtime of three molecular datasets are plotted in Fig. 7 : ∇2DFT, electrolytes, and metal-organics (Table II). Each dataset necessitates a different Lmax , up to 8 for metal-organics which contain Fig. 8: Scalable training and inference on large materials. 

(a) Strong scaling of MALOQ’s training on large material datasets. The times for the forward (orange) and backward (blue) passes are reported for three different partitioning of an amorphous 3000-atom HfO 2 structure (shown in inset). (b) Weak scaling over inference for the same structure as in (a). The problem size is increased according to two tiling scheme: 1-D (tiling along x) and 2-D (tiling along y and z). We measure 92.4% scaling efficiency between 64 and 256 GPUs in the former case, 96.4% in the latter. For (a-b), the reported measurements represent the per-rank median over 180 epochs, after 20 warm-up epochs. Each data point also contains a range (fill-between) indicating the variability in runtime across ranks. lanthanide elements with g-orbitals. We train these datasets on up to 32 Alps nodes (128 GH200 superchips), where the minimum number of nodes depends on the dataset: ∇2DFT’s batch fits on a single node, electrolytes require at least 4 nodes, and metal-organics cannot run on less than 12 nodes. Particularly in the forward pass, the number of edges per GPU at which the scaling efficiency starts dropping roughly corresponds to the point where processing throughput is lost in Fig. 6(b) : ∼10k for ∇2DFT with Lmax = 4 , and ∼5k for the electrolytes with Lmax = 6 . The times for the metal-organics molecules scale well up to 32 nodes, since the average number of edges per partition (6.1k) remains well above the low saturation point for Lmax = 8 (about 2k). 

B. Training and inference over large materials 

Describing material phenomena like phase boundaries [48], interfaces between different materials [49], or amorphous structures [15], translates to the construction of large mate-rial graphs containing 10k+ atoms. When processing node and edge embeddings for structures at these scales, taking advantage of the memory of multiple GPUs through graph-level distribution becomes necessary. First, we test the effect of different partitioning schemes when training on large material graphs. We report in Fig. 8(a) 

the strong scaling performance of MALOQ for the HfO 2

material dataset from Table II . Here, a single structure, corresponding to one batch, contains 3,000 atoms, and roughly 1.8 million edges under a cutoff rcut = 6 .0 ˚A. We measure strong scaling efficiency up to 512 GPUs (128 nodes) on the Alps supercomputer - at this distribution, each rank has, on average ∼ 3 × 10 3 edges. This is the maximum ‘reasonable’ distribution for this problem size, as further distribution would reduce the number of edges per rank, with loss of processing throughput as a consequence (see Fig. 6(b) ). We compare three partitioning strategies: (1) the same edge-wise distribution as for molecules, now performed on the material graph sorted by x-coordinates, (2) the Metis algorithm, and (3) our mod-ified recursive bisection. Partitioning with Metis significantly improves strong scaling over a straightforward edge-wise distribution, as it preserves clusters of locality in such 3-D material graphs. The modified recursive bisection approach slightly outperforms Metis on 512 GPUs, where significant communication times amplify the impact of the partitioning method. In general, Metis and our recursive bisection approach both enable scaling up to 512 GPUs for the backward pass and up to 192 GPUs for the forward pass. 

Figure 8(b) presents weak scaling efficiency for inference using the same amorphous-HfO 2 system. We start on 16 Alps nodes (64 GH200 superchips) with the baseline structure made of 3,000 atoms ( ∼1.8 million edges), and scale up to 64 nodes and 12,000 atoms ( ∼10 million edges). To reliably increase the problem size, we tile the initial 3,000-atom HfO 2 cell according to two strategies: (1) 1-D tiling, where the cell is repeated only along the x-direction, and (2) 2-D tiling, where the cell is repeated along the y- and z-dimensions. In both cases, we use our modified recursive bisection algorithm to partition the tiled graphs. MALOQ achieves nearly ideal weak-scaling efficiency for inference on these structures, 94% with 1-D scaling and 98% with 2-D scaling. V. C ONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 

We introduced MALOQ, a scalable, distributed ML operator prediction code capable of treating higher-rank tensor proper-ties, such as Hessians (rank-2) [10], and electronic structure (Hamiltonian/Density) matrices where the rank (Lmax ) is determined by the orbital basis of the underlying data [6], [8], [50], [5]. It shares its backbone architecture (distributed equivariant GNN with eSCN convolutions) with common energy/force property prediction models, thus allowing for dis-tributed pre-training and finetuning across different quantities. MALOQ can be combined with advanced quantum transport solvers to reveal key features of electronic devices requiring large atomic structures, such as phase-change memory [48], silicon nano-ribbon field-effect transistors [51], or nano-ionic resistive memories [52], [53]. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work was supported by the Swiss National Sci-ence Foundation (SNSF) under grant n◦ 209358 (QuaTrEx), and by the Platform for Advanced Scientific Computing in Switzerland (BoostQT). We acknowledge support from CSCS (projects c33, lp16, lp82). The authors would like to especially thank Tim Robinson (CSCS) for access to and support of the computational resources. REFERENCES [1] E. C.-Y. Yuan, Y. Liu, J. Chen, P. Zhong, S. Raja, T. Kreiman, S. Vargas, W. Xu, M. Head-Gordon, C. Yang, S. M. Blau, B. Cheng, A. Krishnapriyan, and T. Head-Gordon, “Foundation models for atomistic simulation of chemistry and materials,” Nature Reviews Chemistry , vol. 10, no. 3, p. 212–230, Feb. 2026. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41570-025-00793-5 1 [2] I. Batatia, P. Benner, Y. Chiang, A. M. Elena, D. P. Kov´ acs, J. Riebesell, X. R. Advincula, M. Asta, M. Avaylon, W. J. Baldwin, F. Berger, N. Bernstein, A. Bhowmik, F. Bigi, S. M. Blau, V. C˘ arare, M. Ceriotti, S. Chong, J. P. Darby, S. De, F. Della Pia, V. L. Deringer, R. Elijoˇ sius, Z. El-Machachi, E. Fako, F. Falcioni, A. C. Ferrari, J. L. A. Gardner, M. J. Gawkowski, A. Genreith-Schriever, J. George, R. E. A. Goodall, J. Grandel, C. P. Grey, P. Grigorev, S. Han, W. Handley, H. H. Heenen, K. Hermansson, C. H. Ho, S. Hofmann, C. Holm, J. Jaafar, K. S. Jakob, H. Jung, V. Kapil, A. D. Kaplan, N. Karimitari, J. R. Kermode, P. Kourtis, N. Kroupa, J. Kullgren, M. C. Kuner, D. Kuryla, G. Liepuoniute, C. Lin, J. T. Margraf, I.-B. Magd˘ au, A. Michaelides, J. H. Moore, A. A. Naik, S. P. Niblett, S. W. Norwood, N. O’Neill, C. Ortner, K. A. Persson, K. Reuter, A. S. Rosen, L. A. M. Rosset, L. L. Schaaf, C. Schran, B. X. Shi, E. Sivonxay, T. K. Stenczel, C. Sutton, V. Svahn, T. D. Swinburne, J. Tilly, C. van der Oord, S. Vargas, E. Varga-Umbrich, T. Vegge, M. Vondr´ ak, Y. Wang, W. C. Witt, T. Wolf, F. Zills, and G. Cs´ anyi, “A foundation model for atomistic materials chemistry,” The Journal of Chemical Physics , vol. 163, no. 18, p. 184110, 11 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0297006 1, 3 [3] B. M. Wood, M. Dzamba, X. Fu, M. Gao, M. Shuaibi, L. Barroso-Luque, K. Abdelmaqsoud, V. Gharakhanyan, J. R. Kitchin, D. S. Levine, K. Michel, A. Sriram, T. Cohen, A. Das, S. J. Sahoo, A. Rizvi, Z. W. Ulissi, and C. L. Zitnick, “UMA: A family of universal models for atoms,” in The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=SvopaNxYWt 1, 3, 4 [4] A. Mazitov, F. Bigi, M. Kellner, P. Pegolo, D. Tisi, G. Fraux, S. Pozdnyakov, P. Loche, and M. Ceriotti, “Pet-mad as a lightweight universal interatomic potential for advanced materials modeling,” 

Nature Communications , vol. 16, no. 1, Nov. 2025. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-65662-7 1, 3 [5] X. Gong, H. Li, N. Zou, R. Xu, W. Duan, and Y. Xu, “General framework for E(3)-equivariant neural network representation of density functional theory hamiltonian,” Nature Communications ,vol. 14, no. 1, May 2023. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10. 1038/s41467-023-38468-8 1, 3, 10 [6] M. Kaniselvan, B. K. Miller, M. Gao, J. Nam, and D. S. Levine, “Learning from the electronic structure of molecules across the periodic table,” in The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [Online]. Available: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=PS1YS8Wv4t 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 10 [7] J. Nigam, T. Smidt, and G. Dusson, “Machine learning electronic structure and atomistic properties from the external potential,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2602.15345 1 [8] Y. Li, Z. Xia, L. Huang, X. Wei, S. Harshe, H. Yang, E. Luo, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, C. Liu, B. Shao, and M. Gerstein, “Enhancing the scalability and applicability of kohn-sham hamiltonians for molecular systems,” in The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. [Online]. Available: https: //openreview.net/forum?id=twEvvkQqPS 1, 3, 4, 10 [9] C. Venturella, J. Li, C. Hillenbrand, X. Leyva Peralta, J. Liu, and T. Zhu, “Unified deep learning framework for many-body quantum chemistry via green’s functions,” Nature Computational Science , Jun. 2025. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s43588-025-00810-z 1 [10] A. Burger, L. Thiede, N. Rønne, V. Bernales, N. Vijaykumar, T. Vegge, A. Bhowmik, and A. Aspuru-Guzik, “Shoot from the hip: Hessian interatomic potentials without derivatives,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2509.21624 1, 10 [11] M. Brandbyge, J.-L. Mozos, P. Ordej´ on, J. Taylor, and K. Stokbro, “Density-functional method for nonequilibrium electron transport,” 

Physical Review B , vol. 65, no. 16, Mar. 2002. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.65.165401 1 [12] N. Vetsch, A. Maeder, V. Maillou, A. Winka, J. Cao, G. Kwasniewski, L. Deuschle, T. Hoefler, A. N. Ziogas, and M. Luisier, “Ab-initio quantum transport with the gw approximation, 42, 240 atoms, and sustained exascale performance,” in Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , ser. SC ’25. ACM, Nov. 2025, p. 1–13. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3712285.3771784 1 [13] A. Agrawal, W. Chakraborty, W. Li, H. Ryu, B. Markman, S. H. Hoon, R. K. Paul, C. Y. Huang, S. M. Choi, K. Rho, A. Shu, R. Iglesias, P. Wallace, S. Ghosh, K. L. Cheong, J. L. Hockel, R. Thorman, L. Baumgartel, L. Shoer, V. Mishra, S. Berrada, A. Ashita, C. Weber, B. Obradovic, A. A. Oni, Z. Brooks, N. Franco, J. Kavalieros, and G. Dewey, “Silicon ribbonfet cmos at 6nm gate length,” in 2024 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/IEDM50854.2024.10873367 1 [14] H. Tang, B. Xiao, W. He, P. Subasic, A. R. Harutyunyan, Y. Wang, F. Liu, H. Xu, and J. Li, “Approaching coupled-cluster accuracy for molecular electronic structures with multi-task learning,” Nature Computational Science , vol. 5, no. 2, p. 144–154, Dec. 2024. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s43588-024-00747-9 1 [15] C. H. Xia, M. Kaniselvan, A. N. Ziogas, M. Mladenovi´ c, R. Mahjoub, A. Maeder, and M. Luisier, “Learning the electronic hamiltonian of large atomic structures,” in Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ forum?id=WGejWCgrpD 1, 2, 4, 10 [16] D. S. Levine, M. Shuaibi, E. W. C. Spotte-Smith, M. G. Taylor, M. R. Hasyim, K. Michel, I. Batatia, G. Cs´ anyi, M. Dzamba, P. Eastman, N. C. Frey, X. Fu, V. Gharakhanyan, A. S. Krishnapriyan, J. A. Rackers, S. Raja, A. Rizvi, A. S. Rosen, Z. Ulissi, S. Vargas, C. L. Zitnick, S. M. Blau, and B. M. Wood, “The open molecules 2025 (omol25) dataset, evaluations, and models,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2505.08762 1, 2, 4, 6 [17] B. S. Kang, V. C. Bhethanabotla, A. Tavakoli, M. D. Hanisch, W. A. Goddard, and A. Anandkumar, “Orbitall: A unified quantum mechanical representation deep learning framework for all molecular systems,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2507.03853 1[18] D. Suman, J. Nigam, S. Saade, P. Pegolo, H. T¨ urk, X. Zhang, G. K.-L. Chan, and M. Ceriotti, “Exploring the design space of machine learning models for quantum chemistry with a fully differentiable framework,” 

Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation , vol. 21, no. 13, p. 6505–6516, Jun. 2025. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/ acs.jctc.5c00522 1 [19] S. Kim, C. Lee, Y. Kim, S. Yun, H. Kim, N. Kim, C. Park, S. Han, S. Lim, and S. Ahn, “Machine learning hamiltonians are accurate energy-force predictors,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2602.16897 2 [20] S. Passaro and C. L. Zitnick, “Reducing SO(3) convolutions to SO(2) for efficient equivariant GNNs,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, A. Krause, E. Brunskill, K. Cho, B. Engelhardt, S. Sabato, and J. Scarlett, Eds., vol. 202. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023, pp. 27 420–27 438. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/passaro23a.html 2, 4, 5 [21] X. Fu, B. M. Wood, L. Barroso-Luque, D. S. Levine, M. Gao, M. Dzamba, and C. L. Zitnick, “Learning smooth and expressive interatomic potentials for physical property prediction,” in Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, A. Singh, M. Fazel, D. Hsu, S. Lacoste-Julien, F. Berkenkamp, T. Maharaj, K. Wagstaff, and J. Zhu, Eds., vol. 267. PMLR, 13–19 Jul 2025, pp. 17 875–17 893. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/fu25h.html 2 [22] W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, “Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation effects,” Physical Review , vol. 140, no. 4A, p. A1133–A1138, Nov. 1965. [Online]. Available: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1103/PhysRev.140.A1133 3 [23] T. D. K¨ uhne, M. Iannuzzi, M. Del Ben, V. V. Rybkin, P. Seewald, F. Stein, T. Laino, R. Z. Khaliullin, O. Sch¨ utt, F. Schiffmann, D. Golze, J. Wilhelm, S. Chulkov, M. H. Bani-Hashemian, V. Weber, U. Borˇ stnik, M. Taillefumier, A. S. Jakobovits, A. Lazzaro, H. Pabst, T. M¨ uller, R. Schade, M. Guidon, S. Andermatt, N. Holmberg, G. K. Schenter, A. Hehn, A. Bussy, F. Belleflamme, G. Tabacchi, A. Gl¨ oß, M. Lass, I. Bethune, C. J. Mundy, C. Plessl, M. Watkins, J. VandeVondele, M. Krack, and J. Hutter, “Cp2k: An electronic structure and molecular dynamics software package - quickstep: Efficient and accurate electronic structure calculations,” The Journal of Chemical Physics , vol. 152, no. 19, p. 194103, 05 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0007045 3 [24] F. Neese, “The orca program system,” WIREs Computational Molecular Science , vol. 2, no. 1, p. 73–78, Jun. 2011. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/wcms.81 3 [25] W. Jia, H. Wang, M. Chen, D. Lu, L. Lin, R. Car, W. E, and L. Zhang, “Pushing the limit of molecular dynamics with ab initio accuracy to 100 million atoms with machine learning,” in Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , ser. SC ’20. IEEE Press, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://dl.acm.org/doi/abs/10.5555/3433701.3433707 3, 4 [26] B. Kozinsky, A. Musaelian, A. Johansson, and S. Batzner, “Scaling the leading accuracy of deep equivariant models to biomolecular simulations of realistic size,” in Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis , ser. SC ’23. ACM, Nov. 2023, p. 1–12. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3581784.3627041 3, 4 [27] Y. Park, J. Kim, S. Hwang, and S. Han, “Scalable parallel algorithm for graph neural network interatomic potentials in molecular dynamics simulations,” Journal of Chemical Theory and Computation ,vol. 20, no. 11, p. 4857–4868, May 2024. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.jctc.4c00190 3, 4 [28] H. Yu, Z. Xu, X. Qian, X. Qian, and S. Ji, “Efficient and equivariant graph networks for predicting quantum Hamiltonian,” in Proceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, A. Krause, E. Brunskill, K. Cho, B. Engelhardt, S. Sabato, and J. Scarlett, Eds., vol. 202. PMLR, 23–29 Jul 2023, pp. 40 412–40 424. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/yu23i.html 3 [29] Y. Li, Y. Wang, B. Zhao, X. Gong, Y. Wang, Z. Tang, Z. Wang, Z. Yuan, J. Li, M. Sun, Z. Chen, H. Tao, B. Wu, Y. Yu, H. Li, F. H. da Jornada, W. Duan, and Y. Xu, “Deeph-pack: A general-purpose neural network package for deep-learning electronic structure calculations,” 2026. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2601.02938 3 [30] S. Batzner, A. Musaelian, L. Sun, M. Geiger, J. P. Mailoa, M. Kornbluth, N. Molinari, T. E. Smidt, and B. Kozinsky, “E(3)-equivariant graph neural networks for data-efficient and accurate interatomic potentials,” 

Nature Communications , vol. 13, no. 1, May 2022. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-29939-5 3, 4 [31] J. Brehmer, S. Behrends, P. D. Haan, and T. Cohen, “Does equivariance matter at scale?” Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=wilNute8Tn 3 [32] K. T. Sch¨ utt, M. Gastegger, A. Tkatchenko, K.-R. M¨ uller, and R. J. Maurer, “Unifying machine learning and quantum chemistry with a deep neural network for molecular wavefunctions,” Nature Communications , vol. 10, no. 1, Nov. 2019. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12875-2 4 [33] H. Yu, M. Liu, Y. Luo, A. Strasser, X. Qian, X. Qian, and S. Ji, “Qh9: A quantum hamiltonian prediction benchmark for qm9 molecules,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, Eds., vol. 36. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023, pp. 40 487–40 503. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper files/paper/ 2023/file/7f755e271717450020fda40f020922dd-Paper-Datasets and Benchmarks.pdf 3, 4 [34] K. Khrabrov, A. Ber, A. Tsypin, K. Ushenin, E. Rumiantsev, A. Telepov, D. Protasov, I. Shenbin, A. M. Alekseev, M. Shirokikh, S. Nikolenko, E. Tutubalina, and A. Kadurin, “$ \nablaˆ2$DFT: A universal quantum chemistry dataset of drug-like molecules and a benchmark for neural network potentials,” in The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track , 2024. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=ElUrNM9U8c 4 [35] A. S. Christensen and A. V. lilienfeld, “Revised MD17 dataset (rMD17),” 7 2020. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.6084/m9. figshare.12672038.v3 3 [36] H. Li, Z. Wang, N. Zou, M. Ye, R. Xu, X. Gong, W. Duan, and Y. Xu, “Deep-learning density functional theory hamiltonian for efficient ab initio electronic-structure calculation,” Nature Computational Science , vol. 2, no. 6, p. 367–377, Jun. 2022. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s43588-022-00265-6 3 [37] Y. Xie, A. Daigavane, M. Kotak, and T. Smidt, “The price of freedom: Exploring expressivity and runtime tradeoffs in equivariant tensor products,” in Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning , 2025. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id= EvIwwGYTLc 4 [38] V. Bharadwaj, A. Glover, A. Buluc, and J. Demmel, “An efficient sparse kernel generator for o(3)-equivariant deep networks,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2501.13986 4 [39] Y. Wang, H. Li, Z. Tang, H. Tao, Y. Wang, Z. Yuan, Z. Chen, W. Duan, and Y. Xu, “DeepH-2: Enhancing deep-learning electronic structure via an equivariant local-coordinate transformer,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2401.17015 4 [40] Q. Gu, Z. Zhouyin, S. K. Pandey, P. Zhang, L. Zhang, and W. E, “Deep learning tight-binding approach for large-scale electronic simulations at finite temperatures with ab initio accuracy,” Nature Communications , vol. 15, no. 1, Aug. 2024. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-024-51006-4 4 [41] M. Schwade, S. Zhang, F. Vonhoff, F. P. Delgado, and D. A. Egger, “Physics-informed hamiltonian learning for large-scale optoelectronic property prediction,” Nature Communications , vol. 17, no. 1, Mar. 2026. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-70865-7 4 [42] A. P. Thompson, H. M. Aktulga, R. Berger, D. S. Bolintineanu, W. M. Brown, P. S. Crozier, P. J. in ’t Veld, A. Kohlmeyer, S. G. Moore, T. D. Nguyen, R. Shan, M. J. Stevens, J. Tranchida, C. Trott, and S. J. Plimpton, “LAMMPS - a flexible simulation tool for particle-based materials modeling at the atomic, meso, and continuum scales,” Comput. Phys. Commun. , vol. 271, p. 108171, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2021.108171 4 [43] K. Han, B. Deng, A. B. Farimani, and G. Ceder, “DistMLIP: A distributed inference platform for machine learning interatomic potentials,” in The Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations , 2026. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ forum?id=4tasfBIPxp 4 [44] L. Fusco, M. Khalilov, M. Chrapek, G. Chukkapalli, T. Schulthess, and T. Hoefler, “Understanding data movement in tightly coupled heterogeneous systems: A case study with the grace hopper superchip,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2408.11556 5[45] J. Ansel, E. Yang, H. He, N. Gimelshein, A. Jain, M. Voznesensky, B. Bao, P. Bell, D. Berard, E. Burovski, G. Chauhan, A. Chourdia, W. Constable, A. Desmaison, Z. DeVito, E. Ellison, W. Feng, J. Gong, M. Gschwind, B. Hirsh, S. Huang, K. Kalambarkar, L. Kirsch, M. Lazos, M. Lezcano, Y. Liang, J. Liang, Y. Lu, C. K. Luk, B. Maher, Y. Pan, C. Puhrsch, M. Reso, M. Saroufim, M. Y. Siraichi, H. Suk, S. Zhang, M. Suo, P. Tillet, X. Zhao, E. Wang, K. Zhou, R. Zou, X. Wang, A. Mathews, W. Wen, G. Chanan, P. Wu, and S. Chintala, “Pytorch 2: Faster machine learning through dynamic python bytecode transformation and graph compilation,” in Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 2 , ser. ASPLOS ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 929–947. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3620665.3640366 5[46] M. Geiger and T. Smidt, “e3nn: Euclidean neural networks,” 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2207.09453 7 [47] G. Karypis and V. Kumar, “Multilevelk-way partitioning scheme for irregular graphs,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing ,vol. 48, no. 1, p. 96–129, Jan. 1998. [Online]. Available: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1006/jpdc.1997.1404 9 [48] Y. Zhou, W. Zhang, E. Ma, and V. L. Deringer, “Device-scale atomistic modelling of phase-change memory materials,” Nature Electronics , vol. 6, no. 10, p. 746–754, Sep. 2023. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41928-023-01030-x 10, 11 [49] M. Dossena, B. Van Troeye, F. Ducry, J. Cao, A. Afzalian, G. Pourtois, and M. Luisier, “Mobility calculation in disordered ws2-al2o3 stacks from first principles,” npj 2D Materials and Applications , vol. 9, no. 1, Aug. 2025. [Online]. Available: http: //dx.doi.org/10.1038/s41699-025-00587-9 10 [50] J. Nigam, M. J. Willatt, and M. Ceriotti, “Equivariant representations for molecular hamiltonians and n-center atomic-scale properties,” The Journal of Chemical Physics , vol. 156, no. 1, Jan. 2022. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1063/5.0072784 10 [51] G. Yeap, S. Lin, H. Shang, H. Lin, Y. Peng, M. Wang, P. Wang, C. Lin, K. Yu, W. Lee, H. Chen, D. Lin, B. Yang, C. Yeh, C. Chan, J. Kuo, C.-M. Liu, T. Chiu, M. Wen, T. Lee, C. Chang, R. Chen, P.-H. Huang, C. Hou, Y. Lin, F. Yang, J. Wang, S. Fung, R. Chen, C. Lee, T. Lee, W. Chang, D. Lee, C. Ting, T. Chang, H. Huang, H. Lin, C. Tseng, C. Chang, K. Huang, Y. Lu, C.-H. Chen, C. Chui, K. Chen, M. Tsai, C. Chen, N. Wu, H. Chiang, X. Chen, S. Sun, J. Tzeng, K. Wang, Y. Peng, H. Liao, T. Chen, Y. Cheng, J. Chang, K. Hsieh, A. Cheng, G. Liu, A. Chen, H. Lin, K. Chiang, C. Tsai, H. Wang, W. Sheu, J. Yeh, Y. Chen, C. Lin, J. Wu, M. Cao, L. Juang, F. Lai, Y. Ku, S. Jang, and L. Lu, “2nm platform technology featuring energy-efficient nanosheet transistors and interconnects co-optimized with 3DIC for AI, HPC and mobile SoC applications,” in 2024 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) . IEEE, Dec. 2024, p. 1–4. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/IEDM50854.2024.10873475 11 [52] N. Onofrio, D. Guzman, and A. Strachan, “Atomic origin of ultrafast resistance switching in nanoscale electrometallization cells,” Nature Materials , vol. 14, no. 4, p. 440–446, Mar. 2015. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nmat4221 11 [53] M. Kaniselvan, M. Luisier, and M. Mladenovi´ c, “An atomistic model of field-induced resistive switching in valence change memory,” ACS Nano , vol. 17, no. 9, p. 8281–8292, Mar. 2023. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.2c12575 11