Title: Scalable Physics-Inspired Transformers for Spin Glasses

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.22984v2

Published Time: Wed, 24 Jun 2026 00:26:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 32

Markdown Content:
# Scalable Physics-Inspired Transformers for Spin Glasses 

Lu Zhong, 1, ∗ Wenli Duan, 1, ∗ Jing Liu, 2, 3, † Pan Zhang, 3, 4, ‡ and Ying Tang 1, 5, 6, 7, §

> 1

Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 

> 2

School of Physical Science and Technology, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China 

> 3

Institute of Theoretical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China 

> 4

School of Fundamental Physics and Mathematical Sciences, Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study, UCAS, Hangzhou 310024, China 

> 5

School of Physics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 

> 6

Key Laboratory of Quantum Physics and Photonic Quantum Information, Ministry of Education, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 

> 7

Non-classical Information Science Basic Discipline Research Center of Sichuan Province, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, China 

Efficient sampling of the Boltzmann distribution in frustrated spin glasses is central to statistical mechanics and combinatorial optimization. Despite advances in machine-learning-based approaches, two issues persist: limited understanding of why variational models fail to benefit from increased scale, unlike the monotonic scaling law of large language models; and high computational cost on large systems that negates advantages over classical sampling methods. Here, we develop a physics-inspired transformer with interpretable sparse attention and spin-tailored positional embeddings to address these challenges. By further leveraging FlashAttention for parallel ancestral sampling, it achieves up to two orders of magnitude speedup over vanilla variational autoregressive networks, enabling neural-network simulations of spin-glass systems to unprecedented sizes on a single GPU. It can resolve full probability distributions, free energies, and overlap statistics across temperatures, for Sherrington-Kirkpatrick and 2D or 3D Edwards-Anderson models, where existing machine-learning methods encounter limitations at certain temperatures. This framework thus establishes a scalable paradigm for frustrated spin-glass systems. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Understanding the collective behavior of high-dimensional spin-glass models remains a central problem in statistical mechanics and combinatorial optimization [1–4]. The paradigm spin-glass models, such as the Sherrington-Kirkpatrick (SK) [5] and Edwards-Anderson (EA) [6], exhibit frustration, disorder, and rugged energy landscapes. Characterizing these systems, especially in high dimensions and with large sizes, requires resolving exponentially increasing probability distributions over spin configurations. The conventional sampling approaches, including Markov chain Monte Carlo [7], often struggle to equilibrate in the rugged energy landscape, especially near phase transitions where correlation times become extremely long. Consequently, understanding the free-energy landscape, ground state, and phase structure of general spin glasses remains an outstanding theoretical and computational problem in physics. Recent advances in machine learning have opened new possibilities for modeling complex spin-glass systems. In particular, variational autoregressive networks (VANs) [8] offer a powerful method by enabling parallel ancestral sampling from learned Boltzmann distributions. VANs and related generative models have been applied to equilibrium statistical mechanics [9, 10], quantum many-body systems [11–17], and nonequilibrium dynamics [18–20]. Yet a critical limitation lies in the model scalability: unlike large language models, which often exhibit consistent performance gains with increasing scale, autoregressive models for spin-glass systems show no clear scaling advantage. Deeper architectures or more sophisticated designs (e.g., transformers) do not necessarily yield better performance, while often lacking the physical inductive biases needed to capture spin correlations. Thus, practitioners have predominantly relied on simpler architectures such as MADE [21] or NADE [22, 23], whereas these models suffer from degrading performance over increasing system sizes, restricting them to relatively small systems. Besides modeling the full probability distribution at finite temperature, the scalability bottleneck also limits machine-learning methods in the task of searching for ground states at low temperature. The VAN-assisted Monte Carlo simulations have been used but found to struggle on computationally hard problems [24], motivating more     

> ∗These authors contributed equally
> †Corresponding authors: jing.liu@bupt.edu.cn
> ‡Corresponding authors: panzhang@itp.ac.cn
> §Corresponding authors: jamestang23@gmail.com
> arXiv:2606.22984v2 [cond-mat.dis-nn] 23 Jun 2026

2dedicated graph-neural architectures to capture long-range correlations [25]. In parallel, reinforcement-learning ap-proaches for searching spin-glass ground states at low temperatures have also been proposed [26], although their accuracy was debated [27, 28]. This trade-off between architectural expressivity and computational feasibility has left large-scale SK and EA models beyond the reach of the previous machine-learning methods. Developing scalable neural-network approaches that circumvent these barriers while faithfully capturing complex probability distributions across temperatures remains an urgent and unsolved problem. Here, we address these challenges by introducing a physics-inspired transformer built on an interpretable sparse-attention mechanism motivated by large language models such as DeepSeek [29]. This attention pattern explicitly encodes the interaction topology of spin systems, enabling a more faithful representation of lattice geometry and coupling structure. We also design positional embeddings tailored to spin systems suitable for modeling long-range correlations. We further include a hardware-efficient implementation: by leveraging FlashAttention kernels together with key-value (KV) caching for efficient autoregressive sampling, as developed for modern transformers [30–32], the present framework makes training and sampling practical at substantially larger scales. To strengthen performance in challenging low-temperature regimes, we introduce a training strategy that combines local Monte Carlo refine-ment with self-distillation, improving optimization stability while promoting exploration among low-energy valleys. Combined with modern optimization techniques [33], this framework delivers substantial gains in both computational efficiency and accuracy. The present framework accurately resolves free energies, Boltzmann and overlap distributions across temperatures for the paradigmatic SK and EA spin-glass models in both two and three dimensions. It also identifies low-temperature ground states that remain challenging for previous reinforcement-learning approaches [26–28]. On a single GPU, it scales to systems with 4 , 096 spins (Table. I), extending the accessible size range beyond previous neural-network methods [34–36]. It achieves up to two orders of magnitude speedup over the vanilla VAN [8] and improves on recent natural-gradient variants [35]. Beyond the recent observations underlying Global Annealing (GA) [37], our results further show that machine-learning-assisted sampling can be robust over a broader temperature range, while avoiding expensive population-based updates required by annealing-based approaches. These results establish a scalable framework for exploring glassy phase structure in frustrated spin systems at unprecedented scales.                                 

> TABLE I. Comparison of the largest system size reported for the machine-learning methods on the benchmark models. Ap-proaches include the vanilla VAN [8], variational neural annealing (VNA) [34], ng-VAN [35], two-body interactions (TwoBo) [36], nearest-neighbors neural network (4N) [25], GA [37], and our FlashVAN (on a single GPU). Values represent the maximum system size Nreported. NA: Not available, as it was not reported in the original literature. Model VAN VNA ng-VAN TwoBo 4N GA FlashVAN SK 100 100 30 NA NA NA 256 2D EA NA 3,600 NA 1,024 256 NA 3,600 3D EA NA NA NA 1,728 NA 2,744 4,096
> II. RESULTS A. Framework

Consider a spin system of size N , whose configurations σ ∈ {± 1}N follow the Boltzmann distribution 

p(σ) = e−βE (σ)

Z , (1) where β = 1 /T is the inverse temperature and Z is the partition function. The VAN [8] can approximate this target distribution through a tractable autoregressive factorization, qθ (σ) = QNi=1 qθ (σi | σ<i ), allowing for direct sampling. It can yield accurate estimates of thermodynamic observables, such as the free energy F = −(1 /β ) ln Z by minimizing the Kullback-Leibler (KL)-divergence between qθ and p, and the ground-state energy E0 = min σ E(σ). Despite its success, existing VANs still exhibit notable limitations in both representational focus and computational scalability [8]. First, current transformer-based VANs tend to focus excessively on the content information encoded in spin states, while paying insufficient attention to the positional relationships among spins. A key distinction between spin systems and natural language lies in the nature of their tokens: tokens in natural language carry rich semantic meaning, whereas spin tokens are merely symbolic states (+1 / − 1) conveying limited intrinsic information. That is, for spin systems, it is not the content of each token but its positional and relational structure that defines the physical configuration. Several recent studies have also noted that detailed pairwise correlations between spin values A Framework 3c d

e

a b  

> minimize
> Neural Network
> model distribution
> Spin System
> target distribution
> 2D -Ising Sherrington –Kirkpatrick
> 2D -Edwards –Anderson 3D -Edwards –Anderson
> Spin Samples
> LayerNorm 1
> Multi -head
> Attention
> LayerNorm 2
> FFN
> Token embedding layer

+

> Output layer

+

FlashVAN architecture    

> System Size Scaling End -to -end Speedup
> Time per step 𝑁 =1024
> End -to -end Speedup
> 13819ms
> 381ms

36x        

> FlashVAN
> Traditional VAN
> Time per step 𝑁 =576
> A training step for FlashVAN
> Sample
> Optimize
> FlashVAN
> FlashVAN
> Free Energy
> Steps
> Constant
> Free Energy At Any Temperature
> Dynamic
> Ground State Energy At Low Temperature
> Temperature
> Steps
> Annealing during training
> Mean Energy
> Steps
> System size 𝑁
> 64 256 576 1024
> 0.58m
> 2.18m
> 11.77m
> 28.33m
> 3015ms
> 169ms

17x  

> FlashVAN
> Traditional VAN
> Spin
> embedding
> Position
> embedding
> c
> Special embedding design
> Cuda kernel acceleration
> ✓FlashAttention
> Special attention design
> Causal Attention
> Causal Mask
> Special Mask
> Physics -inspired Attention

FIG. 1. The present framework facilitates solving spin-glass problems. (a) Schematic illustration of representative spin-glass systems. (b) Optimization workflow: a parameterized joint distribution, termed FlashVAN, is trained to approximate the Boltzmann distribution of a given Hamiltonian by minimizing the KL-divergence, with free-energy gradients taken with respect to the model parameters. (c) Architecture: featuring CUDA kernel acceleration modules, a physics-inspired attention mechanism, and a tailored positional embedding design, which together enhance expressivity and accuracy. (d) Training results show the convergence of the free energy and ground-state energy under the temperature-annealing scheme. (e) Computational performance, demonstrating a substantial speedup over vanilla VAN approaches including faster sampling procedures, and favorable scaling of computational time with system sizes. 

are often irrelevant for modeling global distributions [38]; for example, replacing the attention weights with a factored (query-key-independent) attention matrix can still yield competitive performance in certain structured tasks [39]. Second, existing VAN implementations, particularly those based on transformer architectures, have not leveraged the latest hardware-efficient algorithms that have become standard in large language models (LLMs). As a result, their scalability remains constrained by quadratic attention complexity and large memory overhead. To tackle these challenges, we propose a physics-inspired, position-aware, and hardware-efficient autoregressive model designed for large-scale spin systems. We term it Flash Variational Autoregressive Network (FlashVAN) to highlight its accelerated computational performance and its variational formulation. Specifically, we employ the physics-inspired sparse attention and develop a new positional embedding mechanism tailored for spin systems, which provides richer structural representations and effectively characterizes spatial correlations across different models, A Framework 4including two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) lattices. In addition, we integrate FlashAttention-based acceleration [31, 32], which substantially reduces the computational cost of parallel ancestral sampling and autore-gressive forward evaluation, enabling efficient training at unprecedented system sizes for neural-network approaches to spin-glass systems on a single GPU.  

> 1. Physics-inspired sparse attention

The design of our attention mechanism is physically rooted in the locality of interactions inherent to two-body Hamiltonians. Standard autoregressive transformer architectures employ full causal self-attention, which evaluates global dependencies across the entire generated sequence. However, the local topological structure of lattice spin models allows for rigorous truncation of this attention span without compromising representational accuracy (Supple-mentary Figure 2). This strategy parallels other physics-inspired autoregressive frameworks, such as TwoBo [36] and tensor network Monte Carlo algorithms [40–42], which explicitly exploit the properties of exact conditional probability in systems with nearest-neighbor interactions. More specifically, for a 2D spin model with open boundary conditions, the exact conditional probability p(σi|σ<i ) is entirely determined by the boundary spins that separate the sampled region from the unsampled region (Fig. 1c). Consequently, predicting the state of site i does not require an attention mechanism spanning the entire sequence history from i − 1 down to 1. Instead, the essential physical dependencies are strictly localized within a receptive field that corresponds to the most recent O(L) sites. Guided by this physical intuition, FlashVAN can implement a physics-inspired sparse attention mechanism restricted to a local window of size L. This truncation reduces the memory footprint and computational complexity of the attention block. Crucially, this structured sparsity pattern integrates seamlessly with FlashAttention kernels, which facilitates further acceleration of training. This physical insight extends naturally to higher dimensions, e.g., in a 3D lattice of linear size L, the effective boundary mediating conditional dependence scales with the cross-sectional area, which yields a requisite attention window of size O(L2) (Section IA, Supplementary Information).  

> 2. Positional embedding

We find that the performance of VANs is highly sensitive to the representation of positional information. To investigate this sensitivity, we systematically evaluated a range of positional encoding strategies across physical models with varying topological complexities. For the Ising model, which is characterized by a simple lattice structure, a learnable additive (absolute) positional embedding is sufficient. However, for the more intricate Sherrington– Kirkpatrick (SK) model, additive embeddings induce pronounced oscillations in the variational free-energy convergence at low temperatures (Supplementary Figure 4). For more structured spin systems, such as the 2D and 3D Edwards– Anderson (EA) models, incorporating relative positional information yields additional empirical gains, suggesting that relative positional embeddings, such as 2D or 3D RoPE [43], are also a promising design choice. One possible explanation is that, for networks with limited depth, encoding positional variance solely through additive offsets tends to conflate spatial and state information, undermining the model’s ability to resolve individual spins and triggering these instabilities. To overcome this, we design a concatenated positional embedding (Fig. 1c) that integrates token and positional vectors into a unified yet distinct representation. This approach improves convergence across a broad range of temperatures and leads to higher accuracy. The training results of FlashVAN advance our understanding of the role of positional embeddings in VANs: rather than attributing instability to a lack of expressivity in autoregressive models, we find that providing accurate and sufficient positional information during model design and training is crucial for stable and efficient learning. This suggests that, in non-language modalities such as spin systems, performance gains may come primarily from properly encoding positional structure rather than from content-based embeddings as in natural language processing. A more detailed analysis of the effects of different positional embeddings is provided in Methods Sec. IV A 2.  

> 3. Overall architecture

We next introduce the overall architecture of FlashVAN, which features a specialized positional embedding scheme and is equipped with FlashAttention-2 [44] for efficient training. The backbone of FlashVAN follows the standard transformer framework: as in other transformer-based neural ansatzes [45–47], it consists of a stack of decoder layers, each containing a self-attention layer followed by a feed-forward network (FFN). Fig. 1c provides an overview of the model architecture. A Framework 5Given a spin configuration σ = {σ1, σ 2, . . . , σ N } of length N , each spin is linearly projected into a d-dimensional embedding space using the concatenated positional embedding as in Eq. (15), producing a sequence of input vectors (x1, x2, . . . , xN ). For higher-dimensional spin systems (e.g., N = L2 in 2D and N = L3 in 3D), the configuration is flattened into a 1D sequence using a raster-scan ordering over the spatial dimensions. In all cases, the resulting sequence is processed in the same manner as the 1D input. Each decoder layer contains a masked multi-head attention layer followed by an FFN. For the attention layer, let nh denote the number of attention heads, dh the dimension per head, and ht ∈ Rd the input to the attention block for the t-th token: 

□t = W□ht = [ □t, 1; □t, 2; . . . ; □t,n h ], (2) where □t ∈ { qt, kt, vt}, W□ ∈ { WQ, WK , WV } ∈ Rdhnh×d are the projection matrices for queries, keys, and values, respectively, and [ ·; ·] denotes concatenation. The attention outputs are computed as: 

ot,i =

> t

X

> j=1

Softmax j

q⊤

> t,i

kj,i 

√dh

!

vj,i ,

ut = [ ot, 1; ot, 2; . . . ; ot,n h ].

(3) Different from the standard transformer architecture, the final output projection WO is bypassed. To accelerate computation, we employ the FlashAttention-2 CUDA kernel for efficient attention calculation, which significantly reduces memory bandwidth overhead during training. In addition, we integrate a key-value (KV) cache strategy to improve sampling efficiency. Implementation details can be found in Methods Section IV B.  

> 4. Optimization: free energy and ground state

Next, we present the training strategy used for FlashVAN. The optimization follows a reinforcement learning style scheme, allowing the model to learn directly from sampled configurations without relying on Markov chains. For a given problem instance, estimating the free energy F = −(1 /β ) ln Z requires an accurate approximation of Z, which is generally intractable to compute directly. To circumvent this, VAN introduces a variational distribution qθ (σ) and minimizes the KL divergence to learn the Boltzmann distribution [8]: 

DKL (qθ ∥p) = X

> σ

qθ (σ) ln qθ (σ)

p(σ) = β (Fq − F ) ≥ 0, (4) where the variational free energy is defined as 

Fq = 1

β

X

> σ

qθ (σ)βE (σ) + ln qθ (σ), (5) minimizing Fq therefore provides an upper bound to the true free energy F .FlashVAN optimizes Fq using a score-function estimator (REINFORCE [48]) with a variance-reduction baseline and hardware-efficient sampling (KV cache + FlashAttention). We optimize the parameters θ using Muon [33], a recently proposed optimizer originally developed for LLMs. In our experiments, Muon exhibits stable convergence while maintaining comparable computational efficiency (Supplementary Information, Section III). This self-sampling and self-training approach eliminates the need for Markov chains, enabling efficient and inde-pendent sampling directly on GPUs while allowing the exact computation of ln qθ (σ). The runtime cost per training step is dominated by sampling, which constitutes the main bottleneck for scaling VANs to larger systems. To mitigate this, we implement FlashVAN with a KV-cache sampling procedure (Algorithm 2). By caching past key-value vectors during autoregressive generation, we avoid redundant recomputation and further boost performance using FlashAt-tention CUDA kernels. Supplementary Figure 7 provides a per-step runtime comparison between vanilla VANs and FlashVAN across system scales. With the optimized sampling pipeline, the total wall-clock time required by our model is approximately 19.85 minutes for 4,000 training steps on the SK model ( N = 256), corresponding to tasks such as free energy estimation. For the 2D EA model ( N = 60 2), the runtime is about 4.83 hours for 6,600 training steps. All experiments are performed on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU. For estimating the ground-state energy, the same training framework applies, augmented with an annealing scheme. As temperature is annealed ( T ↓), the entropic contribution in Fq (proportional to T ) vanishes, and the objective reduces to minimizing Eqθ [E(σ)], yielding the ground-state energy in the T → 0 limit. The annealing strategy we adopt can be found in Methods Sec. IV C 2. At low temperatures, however, training is especially sensitive to mode collapse: A Framework 6accurate overlap distributions and reliable ground-state search require both exploration of competing valleys and concentration on low-energy configurations. We therefore combine the variational objective with local Monte Carlo refinement and a self-distillation loss. This design, motivated by the observation in the GA study that generative-model samples become substantially more useful after local Monte Carlo relaxation [37], is a key ingredient in the results discussed below. 

B. Application to spin glass systems 

We have evaluated our FlashVAN on a variety of classical statistical physics systems, including the SK and EA models (Table. I). The experimental results show that FlashVAN achieves accurate reconstruction of the Boltzmann distribution and estimates key thermodynamic quantities such as the free energy and ground-state energy. 

1. Sherrington–Kirkpatrick model Runtime and Speed Comparison cSherrington –Kirkpatrick Model a Free -Energy Convergence b

> Finite -Size Scaling of Ground -state Energy

fGound -state Energy by Annealing d Estimated Accuracy vs. 𝛽 e         

> 𝐻 =−1
> 𝑁 ෍
> 𝑖 <𝑗
> 𝐽 𝑖𝑗 𝑠 𝑖 𝑠 𝑗
> spin up
> spin down
> ferromagnetic ( 𝐽 𝑖𝑗 >0)
> antiferromagnetic (𝐽 𝑖𝑗 <0)

FIG. 2. FlashVAN efficiently gives accurate free energy and ground-state energy for the SK model. (a) Illustrated SK model with random interactions Jij . (b) Free-energy convergence for various system sizes N at β = 0 .5 relative to the thermodynamic limit (dashed). (c) Efficiency comparison between traditional transformer-VAN and FlashVAN: runtime vs. batch size (top) and training throughput (bottom). (d) Ground-state energy trajectories during annealing ( N = 256) for three disorder instances (solid) against the finite-size corrections (FSC)-derived exact value (dashed). The inset shows the temperature annealing schedule. (e) Accuracy versus inverse temperature β, shown by the variance of the estimated free energy for N = 30 and N = 256, while the inset reports the relative error |f − fexact |/|fexact | for N = 30. (f) Extrapolation of ensemble-averaged ground-state energy versus size. The cross ( ×) marks the RSB solution [49] at ⟨e0⟩N =∞ = −0.763(2), with the fitted line by Eq. (7). 

The SK model is a classical benchmark for spin-glass behavior, defined on N binary spins σ = ( σ1, . . . , σ N ) with 

σi ∈ {± 1}. Its Hamiltonian is 

H (σ) = − 1

√N

X

> i<j

Jij σiσj , (6) where the off-diagonal couplings Jij for i < j are independent and identically distributed Gaussian random variables with mean zero and unit variance, and Jij = Jji with Jii = 0. With the 1 /√N scaling, the energy density has a well-behaved thermodynamic limit. Owing to full connectivity and strong frustration, the SK energy landscape B Application to spin glass systems 7contains a profusion of local minima; accordingly, vanilla VANs often struggle to capture the long-range correlations and complex disorder structure present in this model. We first evaluate variational fitting and free-energy estimation at a fixed nonzero temperature to test FlashVAN’s ability to approximate the Boltzmann distribution p(σ). Fig. 2b shows the convergence of the estimated free energy during training for N = 64 , 128 , 256. As N increases, the converged values move toward the thermodynamic-limit reference F∞ ≈ − 1.5112. We further compare the runtime and computational throughput of FlashVAN with a tradi-tional transformer-based VAN. As shown in Fig. 2c, the transformer-VAN runtime increases rapidly with batch size, whereas FlashVAN remains nearly constant over the tested range. Measured throughput (GFLOPs/s) is consistently higher for FlashVAN, with speedup increasing as the sequence length grows, reaching up to 58 .34 × at a sequence length of 512. These results indicate substantially improved GPU utilization for FlashVAN during both training and sampling (timing protocol is detailed in the Supplementary Information). We next evaluate FlashVAN on the task of estimating the ground-state energy of the SK model. Fig. 2d shows the evolution of the estimated energy density for N = 256. Following the annealing strategy described in Methods Sec. IV C 2, the temperature is gradually decreased toward zero during training. Consistent with this schedule, the optimization transitions from a high-temperature regime (where entropy contributes more strongly) to a low-temperature regime where the objective approaches the internal energy, and the estimate stabilizes near the final ground-state value obtained from finite-size scaling for this system size. Using the same training configuration (number of heads nheads = 4, token embedding dimension dtoken = 2, position embedding dimension dpos = 254 and number of layers nlayers = 2), we test three independent disorder instances. All three runs converge to consistent ground-state energy estimates close to the reference value. Fig. 2e summarizes the estimation accuracy across inverse temperatures β. We report the variance of the estimated free energy Var[ f ] for N = 30 and N = 256, which remains below 10 −4 over the tested β range. For N = 30, we additionally compute the exact free energy fexact by exhaustive enumeration. The inset of Fig. 2e shows the relative error |f − fexact |/|fexact |, which stays on the order of 10 −6 ∼ 10 −4. These results indicate that FlashVAN provides accurate free-energy estimates from high to low temperatures within the evaluated regime. For disorder ensembles such as SK and EA, the disorder-averaged ground-state energy density admits a well-defined thermodynamic limit as N → ∞ . In practice, this limit is approached in a systematic way through finite-size corrections (FSC). Denoting the thermodynamic-limit value by ⟨e0⟩N =∞, a commonly used asymptotic form is [27]: 

⟨e0⟩N ∼ ⟨ e0⟩N =∞ + AN ω + . . . , N → ∞ , (7) where A is a constant and ω(> 0) is the correction exponent. While additional subleading terms or alternative correction forms may be present, checking whether finite-N data are consistent with this scaling provides a useful baseline for assessing how well a heuristic method extrapolates toward the large-N regime. As shown in Fig. 2f, in the case of SK, the replica-symmetry-breaking (RSB) prediction provides the thermodynamic-limit ground state energy density ⟨e0⟩N =∞ = −0.763(2), marked by ×. The FSC fit uses A ≈ 0.70(1) and the correction exponent ω = 2 /3. We train FlashVAN for N = 64 , 128 , 256, using n = 3000, 726, 162 independent disorder instances, respectively (each generated by an independent draw of Jij ). The resulting estimates follow the FSC trend closely, supporting the scalability of FlashVAN to larger system sizes.  

> 2. Edwards–Anderson model in 2D

The EA Ising spin-glass model is defined in general dimension D by 

H = − X

> ⟨ij ⟩

Jij σiσj , (8) where σi ∈ {± 1} are Ising spins, and the summation ⟨ij ⟩ runs over all nearest-neighbor pairs on a D-dimensional lattice. The couplings Jij are independent Gaussian random variables with zero mean and unit variance. For Gaussian disorder, the ground state is almost surely unique up to a global spin flip for any finite system. Each specific realization of {Jij } is referred to as an instance of the disorder. In the following, we first present results for the 2D case, where the system size is N = L2; results for the 3D case will be discussed in the next section. To assess whether the learned model captures equilibrium properties of the EA spin glass, we analyze the overlap between two statistically independent replicas sampled at the same temperature for a fixed disorder instance. The overlap (similarity) between two such configurations σ1 and σ2 is defined as: 

q = 1

N σ1 · σ2 = 1

N

> N

X

> i=1

σ1 

> i

σ2 

> i

. (9) B Application to spin glass systems 8Residual Energy per Site vs. System Size c

> Edwards -Anderson Model

a Probability Distribution of the Overlap q b          

> 𝐻 =−෍
> ۦ𝑖 ,ۧ𝑗
> 𝐽 𝑖𝑗 𝑠 𝑖 𝑠 𝑗
> spin up
> spin down
> ferromagnetic ( 𝐽 𝑖𝑗 >0)
> antiferromagnetic (𝐽 𝑖𝑗 <0)

FIG. 3. FlashVAN generates accurate ground-state energy and overlap distribution for the 2D EA model. (a) Illustrated 2D EA model, where spins are arranged on a square lattice and coupled via nearest-neighbor interactions. The coupling Jij can be ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic. (b) Probability distributions of the overlap q (defined in Eq. (9)). The solid lines from FlashVAN match the dashed lines from PT and Kac-Ward formula [50]. (c) Residual energy per site versus system size L for open and periodic boundary conditions. Data are averaged over 20 disorder instances. 

The overlap distribution p(q) is a sensitive diagnostic of spin-glass structure and has been widely used to characterize equilibrium behavior. Fig. 3b compares the overlap distributions obtained from FlashVAN with those generated by parallel tempering (PT) and Kac-Ward formula [50], which serve as high-quality equilibrium references, at temper-ature T = 0 .31 for four representative disorder instances. In all four cases, FlashVAN accurately reproduces the complex, multi-peaked structure of p(q), indicating that the learned sampling distribution is consistent with equi-librium statistics in the low-temperature regime. Details of training and model architecture are in Supplementary Information, Section I. We next evaluate the performance of FlashVAN in estimating the ground-state energy across different system sizes and boundary conditions. Specifically, we consider system sizes spanning from L = 8 to 60, with either open or periodic boundary conditions. For each instance, FlashVAN predicts the ground-state energy epred 0 , which is compared against the exact value eexact 0 obtained using McGroundState [51]. Fig. 3c reports the residual energy ϵres = |epred 0 − eexact 0 |.As shown, the residuals remain at the level of 10 −5 ∼ 10 −3, indicating FlashVAN’s consistent instance-wise accuracy. We observe a modest increase in the residuals for periodic boundary conditions at the largest system size, suggesting that periodic boundaries introduce a more challenging optimization landscape. Nevertheless, the accuracy remains within the same order of magnitude over the evaluated range. Recent transformer-based neural samplers have also been applied to 2D EA systems of comparable size, reaching 64 × 64 spins in finite-temperature Boltzmann-distribution sampling [52]. Compared with this setting, FlashVAN provides substantially shorter training times, as reported above, while covering both temperature-dependent overlap distributions and low-temperature ground-state energy estimates. 

3. Edwards–Anderson model in 3D 

We next consider the more challenging 3D EA model. We use the overlap distribution p(q) as the benchmark to evaluate the performance of FlashVAN and compare it with other algorithms. As shown in Fig. 4b, we reproduce the setting as described in [37]. The gray histogram represents the equilibrium overlap distribution obtained from PT. FlashVAN achieves the best agreement with the PT reference across all four temperature points, ranging from the high-temperature regime ( T = 1 .92) down to the low-temperature regime ( T = 0 .1). FlashVAN can faithfully represent B Application to spin glass systems 9Finite -Size Scaling of Ground -state Energy c

> Edwards -Anderson Model

a           

> 𝐻 =−෍
> ۦ𝑖 ,ۧ𝑗
> 𝐽 𝑖𝑗 𝑠 𝑖 𝑠 𝑗
> spin up
> spin down
> ferromagnetic ( 𝐽 𝑖𝑗 >0)
> antiferromagnetic (𝐽 𝑖𝑗 <0)
> Probability Distribution of the Overlap q

b

FIG. 4. Accurate ground state and overlap distribution across temperatures for the 3D EA model by FlashVAN. 

(a) Illustrated 3D EA model, where spins are coupled by random nearest-neighbor interactions Jij . (b) The overlap distributions 

P (q) at four representative temperatures for system size L = 10. PA, GA, and FlashVAN are in different columns, where FlashVAN achieves consistently high accuracy across temperatures. Black curves with shade are from PT [37] as baseline. (c) Finite-size scaling of the ensemble-averaged ground-state energy, for assessing the scalability of optimization heuristics [27]. Open circles denote results by FlashVAN for N = 4 3, 63, 83, 10 3, 14 3 and 16 3, averaged over n = 1110 , 651 , 300 , 50 , 40 , 20 disorder instances, respectively. Open squares denote the available PT benchmark results from [53]. The solid line shows the FSC fit with the thermodynamic-limit value from RSB [49]. The close agreement between the FlashVAN results and the FSC scaling curve demonstrates its scalability and high accuracy. 

highly complex probability distributions and therefore can serve as a high-quality sampler. Population Annealing (PA) agrees with the reference distribution at most temperatures but breaks down at the lowest temperature, failing to reproduce the correct peak weights and q = 0 symmetry. GA exhibits the opposite trend, with weaker agreement at intermediate temperatures but improved performance at low temperatures (results for PA and GA are from [37]). The superior performance of FlashVAN can be attributed to the incorporation of local Monte Carlo updates and a modification of the training loss. As described in Methods IV C 1, the gradient takes the form of a score-function estimator (REINFORCE [48]). However, directly applying this loss to estimate the overlap distribution at low temperatures leads to mode collapse. This behavior can be understood as arising from an objective that resembles the reverse KL divergence, which is known to be mode-seeking and therefore reduces exploration by concentrating probability mass on a limited set of configurations. We introduce a simple yet effective loss function modification to mitigate this issue. Specifically, the modified objec-tive interpolates between a reverse-KL-driven exploration term and a likelihood-based regularization term, stabilizing training at low temperatures. Compared to the original loss gradient (Eq. (19)), the modified loss gradient is: 

∇θ Fq ∝ 1

M

> M

X

> m=1

 L(σ(m)) − L∇θ ln qθ (σ(m)) − w · ∇ θ ln qθ (σ(m)), (10) where w controls the relative weight of the additional term −w · ∇ θ ln qθ (σ(m)). This term can be interpreted as introducing a maximum-likelihood-type regularization. Another important modification concerns the sampling of these configurations: instead of using the raw samples generated by FlashVAN, we refine the raw samples by using a short local Monte Carlo procedure [37] before evaluating the loss. Together, these two changes constitute a form of teacher distillation, in which local Monte Carlo dynamics provide physically inspired guidance during training. The added likelihood term guides the model toward assigning higher probability to physically relevant configurations, while the original reverse-KL-like term maintains sufficient explo-ration. With this improved training strategy, FlashVAN consistently reproduces the overlap distribution across all 10 four temperatures and achieves close agreement with the PT reference, outperforming both GA and PA. Additional results illustrating the role of these two changes are provided in Section IC of the Supplementary Information. All results discussed above correspond to a system size of N = 10 3. To further assess the scalability of FlashVAN, we perform a finite-size scaling analysis of the ensemble-averaged ground-state energy density, following the same procedure as in the SK case. The FSC fit (Eq. (7)) uses a constant A ≈ 1.641, and the correction component 

ω = 1 − θ/d ≈ 0.92, and the thermodynamic limit for the ensemble-averaged ground-state energy density ⟨e0⟩N =∞ ≈−1.701. As shown in Fig. 4c, the average energy per spin computed by FlashVAN agrees well with the FSC fit across system sizes ranging from 4 3 to 16 3, demonstrating strong scalability to large three-dimensional spin-glass systems. For comparison, we also include the available PT benchmark results from [53]. The open squares denote PT results for N = 4 3, 63, 83, and 10 3, averaged over 2 × 10 5, 2 × 10 4, 3 × 10 3, and 1 .3 × 10 3 disorder instances, respectively. The agreement of FlashVAN with both the FSC scaling curve and the available PT benchmarks supports its accuracy across system sizes.  

> III. DISCUSSION

We have developed FlashVAN, an autoregressive framework that integrates physics-inspired attention, tailored positional embeddings and hardware-efficient acceleration. In particular, FlashVAN achieves up to two orders-of-magnitude acceleration over vanilla VANs while maintaining high accuracy across a range of benchmark models, including the Sherrington–Kirkpatrick and Edwards–Anderson systems. It enables efficient single-GPU sampling at unprecedented system sizes for neural-network approaches to spin-glass systems, while the validated benchmarks reported here emphasize quantitative accuracy in thermodynamic observables, ground-state estimates, and represen-tative overlap-distribution diagnostics. Our results suggest that scalability arises from combining physically inspired architectural design with a tailored training strategy. Performance emerges from aligning model inductive biases with the structure of disordered systems, together with training procedures that stabilize learning in rugged energy landscapes. Specifically, the combination of local Monte Carlo refinement and self-distillation proves essential under forward KL training, especially in low-temperature regimes where the target distribution becomes highly structured. Extending to larger or more frustrated systems may require improved sampling and refinement strategies to provide high-quality training signals, pointing to a continued interplay between Monte Carlo methods and learned generative models. The neural networks and tensor networks [54] each excel in different aspects. The tensor-network, such as matrix product states and projected entangled pair states, have achieved remarkable success in one- and two-dimensional systems separately. Their extension to high-dimensional or highly connected systems can be constrained by the rapidly increasing bond dimension. Recent advances, including tensor network Markov chain Monte Carlo [55], alleviate this issue, yet remain tied to structured decompositions and lattice geometry. Instead, FlashVAN naturally accommodates diverse interaction topologies and learns the probability distribution across a wide range of temperatures. Hybridizing neural and tensor-network approaches, by leveraging the scalability of neural networks and the precision of tensor-network representations, offers a promising route for investigating more complex spin systems. More broadly, this work underscores the value of combining physical principles with advances in large-scale language modeling. Future work may explore adaptive sparsity patterns, improved optimization strategies, and more stringent benchmark comparisons based on distributional observables. In particular, upon completing this manuscript, we became aware of the recent large-scale Monte Carlo study [56], which provides new low-temperature benchmark data for the three-dimensional Edwards-Anderson spin glass, with high-statistics equilibrated simulations reaching L = 16. Their results offer a timely and complementary reference for assessing learned neural-network samplers through overlap-distribution observables. The finite-size analysis of the ensemble-averaged ground-state energy in Fig. 4 indicates the potential of FlashVAN to handle larger system sizes, and the representative L = 10 overlap-distribution benchmarks suggest that FlashVAN can capture nontrivial structure in P (q) beyond thermodynamic averages. Asystematic investigation comparing the method in [56] and the neural-network approach would be another natural and important direction for future work. Beyond equilibrium classical spin systems, the present framework can also be extended to dynamical settings, including glassy dynamics [57] modeled by kinetically constrained models [19, 58], and to quantum many-body problems. These directions point toward a general paradigm in which physically grounded modeling and modern machine learning architectures jointly enable scalable and accurate solutions to large-size and strongly correlated systems. A Detailed architectures in FlashVAN 11   

> IV. METHODS A. Detailed architectures in FlashVAN

In this section, we present the pseudocode (Algorithm 1) outlining the implementation steps of the FlashVAN used in this study, as described in the Results section. Compared with conventional decoder-only transformer architectures, our design differs in two key aspects: the physics-inspired attention mechanism and the use of concatenated positional embeddings. The former is crucial for scaling FlashVAN to larger system sizes, while the latter significantly enhances the expressive capacity of FlashVAN. 

Algorithm 1 FlashVAN                                        

> 1: Input configuration σ∈ {− 1,+1 }N
> 2: Concatenate Positional Embed: X ← (x1, . . . xN)∈Rd
> 3: for i= 1 , n ldo
> 4: X ← X + MHA(LayerNorm( X)) ▷physics-inspired attention
> 5: X ← LayerNorm( X)
> 6: X ← X + FFN( X)
> 7: end for
> 8: (z1, . . . zN)←OutputHead( X)
> 9: log[ q(σ)] ←PNi=1 log(softmax( zi)σi)
> 1. Autoregressive factorization and the ordered Markov boundary

Consider an Ising model defined on a graph G = ( V, E ) with |V | = N spins, where E = {(i, j ) : i, j ∈ V, i ̸ = j}

denotes the set of edges encoding pairwise interactions. The Ising model naturally defines a Markov random field (MRF) whose joint distribution P (σ) follows the Boltzmann distribution. The local Markov property of the MRF states that each spin si is conditionally independent of all other spins given its immediate neighbors (its Markov blanket ). To enable autoregressive sampling we impose a fixed total ordering ≺ on the vertex set V (for example, a raster scan). This ordering gives an exact factorization of the joint distribution via the chain rule: 

P (σ) = 

> N

Y

> i=1

P (σi | σ≺i), (11) where σ≺i denotes the configuration of all spins preceding i under the ordering. Let Pi = {j ∈ V : j ≺ i} be the set of “past” (already sampled) spins and Fi = {j ∈ V : j ≻ i} the set of “future” (not yet sampled) spins. Because of the Markov properties of the underlying graph, the autoregressive conditional P (σi | σPi ) need not depend on the entire past Pi. One can therefore identify a minimal conditioning set, which we call the ordered Markov boundary .Given the ordering ≺, the ordered Markov boundary of spin i, denoted ∂≺(i), is the minimal subset of Pi such that 

si is conditionally independent of the remaining past given σ∂≺(i):

σi ⊥⊥ σPi\∂≺(i) | σ∂≺(i). (12) Graphically, ∂≺(i) consists of those past nodes j ∈ Pi that are either directly adjacent to i in G, or connected to i by a path j → v1 → · · · → vk → i, whose intermediate nodes v1, . . . , v k all lie in the unsampled future Fi. Intuitively, only past nodes that can influence i through chains passing entirely via future nodes remain relevant after marginalizing out Fi.Consequently, the autoregressive conditional depends only on the ordered Markov boundary: P (σi | σPi ) = P (σi |

σ∂≺(i)). An explicit expression for the conditional is obtained by marginalizing over the future variables Fi:

P (σi | σPi ) = 

P

> σFi

P (σPi , σ i, σFi )

P

> σi,σFi

P (σPi , σ i, σFi ) . (13) In graphical-model language, marginalizing out a set of nodes Fi induces a new graph structure over the remaining nodes Pi ∪ { i}. Specifically, marginalization fully connects the neighbors of any marginalized node, effectively creating “fill-edges” across the boundary separating Pi and Fi. Therefore, the only variables in Pi that remain directly B Details of hardware acceleration 12 dependent on si after marginalizing Fi are those connected to i via paths through Fi, or those directly adjacent to i.This set is exactly ∂≺(i). This observation has a direct algorithmic implication for autoregressive modelling and the construction of sparse attention patterns: when sampling or predicting σi in the chosen ordering, it suffices to condition on (or attend to) the ordered Markov boundary ∂≺(i). Exploiting this minimal dependency yields exact autoregressive conditionals while enabling a principled sparse attention design that reduces computation without sacrificing correctness.  

> 2. Concatenated Positional Embedding

A key feature of FlashVAN is its special positional embedding scheme designed for spin sequences. In the origi-nal transformer developed for natural language processing, attention captures relationships between tokens, whereas positional embeddings explicitly encode order because the architecture itself is position-invariant. In this context, se-mantic dependencies play a far more dominant role than absolute positional information. In fact, decoder-only models trained with causal masking can implicitly encode positional information, a mechanism referred to as NoPE [59]. However, this situation is fundamentally reversed in spin systems. The spin configuration σ differs greatly from natural language data. Each spin can only take two possible states (+1 or -1), meaning the vocabulary size is merely 2, vastly smaller than that of natural language. More importantly, the spatial correlations between spins at different positions encode the essential physical properties of the system. Therefore, we hypothesize that, unlike in natural language modeling, positional information is the central factor governing the representational power of transformer-based VANs. To validate this hypothesis, we design a concatenated positional embedding, which unifies the token embedding and positional embedding into a single vector. Let dtoken denote the token embedding dimension, and dpos the positional embedding dimension, with the overall embedding dimension d = dtoken + dpos . A spin configuration is represented as 

σ = ( σ1, σ 2, . . . , σ N ), (14) where each σi ∈ { +1 , −1} indicates the spin state (up or down, dtoken = 2), and N is the number of spins. For every spin σi in the configuration, we construct the model input vector using the concatenated positional embedding: 

si = Embed( σi) ∈ Rdtoken ,

pi = Embed( pi) ∈ Rdpos ,

xi = [ si ; pi ] ∈ Rd,

(15) where each row corresponds to the trainable embedding vector for the position i. The operator [ · ; · ] denotes vector concatenation. Under this embedding scheme, we intentionally amplify positional signals in FlashVAN while down-weighting spin embedding signals. We also tested how our new concatenated positional embedding performs compared to the com-monly used absolute positional embedding method. The results reveal that our concatenated positional embedding demonstrated the best performance on spin-system tasks. Detailed experimental settings can be found in Supplemen-tary Information, Section IB.  

> B. Details of hardware acceleration

Apart from the architectural innovations, another major highlight of FlashVAN lies in its training efficiency. By leveraging hardware-optimized CUDA kernels, FlashVAN can efficiently handle systems with 16 3 spins, a regime that is practically inaccessible to vanilla VANs. Hardware acceleration is incorporated into FlashVAN in two main ways. First, we replace the standard atten-tion with FlashAttention-2 [44], an efficient attention kernel optimized for modern GPU architectures, reducing memory overhead and improving computational efficiency. Second, a KV cache is used during sampling to accelerate autoregressive generation, consistent with the common practice in LLM inference.  

> 1. CUDA-kernel acceleration

Efficient kernel implementations are essential for practical training, yet are often underutilized in existing VAN implementations. Modern GPUs are highly optimized for deep-learning workloads, providing specialized compute B Details of hardware acceleration 13 units such as Tensor Cores and Tensor Memory Accelerators (TMAs). FlashVAN is designed to explicitly take advantage of these hardware features. In transformer-based models, the attention matrix computation has quadratic complexity with respect to the sequence length L. For large L, explicitly materializing the L × L attention matrix is both memory- and bandwidth-intensive. However, in practice, the quantity of interest is the product Attn · V , rather than the attention matrix itself. Moreover, data movement between different levels of GPU memory is often the dominant cost in large-scale training. Kernel designs that keep intermediate results in registers or shared memory, rather than repeatedly accessing global memory, can therefore yield substantial speed-ups. FlashAttention-2 exploits these principles by tiling the attention computation with online softmax [60], streaming blocks of queries, keys and values through on-chip memory, and orchestrating compute to maximize arithmetic intensity. By integrating FlashAttention-2 , FlashVAN achieves an approximate 36 × speedup for the combined forward and backward passes compared with a baseline PyTorch implementation. Moreover, the performance gap widens as the sequence length increases. All measurements are conducted on identical hardware at a sequence length of 1024; further details are provided in the Supplementary Information, Section IIB. 

Algorithm 2 KV cache sampling in FlashVAN.  

> 1:

Input: batch size B, sequence length N , number of layers nℓ 

> 2:

Initialize token buffer samples s ∈ NB×N 

> 3:

Initialize KV caches {K(ℓ), V (ℓ)}nℓ 

> ℓ=1

as preallocated GPU tensors  

> 4:

Initialize cache lengths len ← 0 ∈ NB 

> 5:

for t = 1 , N do  

> 6:

if t = 1 then  

> 7:

xt ← [0; ] ▷ Start token (default: 0)  

> 8:

else  

> 9:

xt ← [s:,t −1] ▷ previous sampled token  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

h ← Concatenate Positional Embedding( xt, t ) 

> 12:

for ℓ = 1 , n ℓ do  

> 13:

hnorm ← LayerNorm1 (ℓ)(h) 

> 14:

(q(ℓ) 

> t

, k(ℓ) 

> t

, v(ℓ) 

> t

) ← LinearQKV (ℓ)(hnorm ) 

> 15:

o(ℓ) 

> t

← flash attn with kvcache  q(ℓ) 

> t

, K(ℓ), V(ℓ), len , causal = True  

> 16:

h ← h + o(ℓ) 

> t

▷ self-attention residual  

> 17:

h ← h + FFN (ℓ) LayerNorm2 (ℓ)(h) ▷ feed-forward residual  

> 18:

Append ( k(ℓ) 

> t

, v(ℓ) 

> t

) to caches: ( K(ℓ), V(ℓ)) ← (K(ℓ), V(ℓ)) ∪ (k(ℓ) 

> t

, v(ℓ) 

> t

) 

> 19:

end for  

> 20:

len ← len + 1  

> 21:

zt ← OutputHead( h) 

> 22:

pt ← softmax( zt) 

> 23:

s:,t ∼ Categorical( pt) 

> 24:

end for  

> 25:

Map tokens to spins: σ ← 2 · s − 1 

> 26:

Output: spin configurations σ ∈ {− 1, +1 }B×N

2. Sampling Strategy 

As discussed in the Results section, during each training iteration, the time spent on sampling dominates the total runtime; thus, accelerating the sampling process directly translates into faster overall training. In a com-mon transformer-based VAN, generating a spin configuration of length N proceeds autoregressively. At generation step t, the model computes query, key, and value vectors ( qt, k0: t, v0: t). At the next step, t+1, it recomputes (qt+1 , k0: t+1 , v0: t+1 ). It is evident that k0: t and v0: t are identical to those computed in the previous step, leading to redundant computation that grows quadratically with N .To mitigate this inefficiency, FlashVAN adopts a KV cache strategy, similar to that used in LLM inference [61, 62]. At each generation step t, the model only computes the new vectors ( qt, kt, vt) while reusing the cached ( k0: t−1, v0: t−1)from previous steps. After the attention weights are updated through the softmax operation, the new key and value vectors are appended to the cache, forming an updated set ( k0: t, v0: t) for subsequent steps. This reuse strategy effectively removes redundant computation across generation steps, reducing the complexity of sampling from O(N 3)to O(N 2). The detailed procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2. Although further optimizations are possible, the C Details of training neural networks 14 present design demonstrates that hardware-aware caching can substantially accelerate both sampling and training, opening new directions for efficient VAN architectures.   

> C. Details of training neural networks
> 1. Training strategy

In this section, we describe the training strategy adopted for FlashVAN. As detailed in the Results section, the model is trained to approximate the Boltzmann distribution by minimizing the KL divergence in Eq. (4), which leads to Eq. (5). By multiplying both sides by β and differentiating, we obtain the following: 

β ∇θ Fq = ∇θ

X

> σ

qθ (σ) [ βE (σ) + ln qθ (σ)] . (16) Expanding the derivative gives 

β ∇θ Fq = X

> σ

∇θ qθ (σ) ( βE (σ) + ln qθ (σ)) + qθ (σ) ∇θ ln qθ (σ). (17) Using the identity ∇θ qθ (σ) = qθ (σ) ∇θ ln qθ (σ) and rewriting the summation as an expectation over qθ , we obtain 

β ∇θ Fq = Eσ∼qθ (σ)

∇θ ln qθ (σ) ( βE (σ) + ln qθ (σ)) . (18) Similar to the policy gradient algorithm in reinforcement learning [48], the gradient is estimated as [8]: 

∇θ Fq ∝ 1

M

> M

X

> m=1

 L(σ(m)) − L∇θ ln qθ (σ(m)), (19) where {σ(m)}Mm=1 are M spin configurations sampled from qθ , L(σ) = βE (σ) + ln qθ (σ), and L is a baseline used to reduce the variance of the gradient estimator. For the ground-state objective, we reparameterize the loss in terms of the temperature T , yielding an equivalent form L(σ) = E(σ) + T ln qθ (σ) up to a constant scaling. As annealing proceeds and T decreases, the entropy term T ln qθ (σ) becomes progressively negligible, and the objective reduces to pure energy minimization.  

> 2. Variational annealing

To obtain the ground state using a variational autoregressive network, an annealing strategy is helpful to progres-sively lower the temperature during training [34]. This gradual cooling process allows the model to transition from learning finite-temperature Boltzmann distributions to discovering the zero-temperature configuration that minimizes the energy. As the temperature decreases ( T ↓, β ↑), the entropy term T Eqθ [ln qθ (σ)] gradually vanishes, and the objective reduces to: lim   

> T→0

Fq = Eqθ [E(σ)] ↘ E0,

where E0 = min σ E(σ) is the ground-state energy. Thus, by annealing the temperature T during training, the objective transitions smoothly from learning finite-temperature free energy to identifying the zero-temperature ground state. The annealing schedule implemented in FlashVAN is described below. As visualized in Fig. 1d, the schedule starts from an initial temperature T0 and gradually approaches the zero-temperature limit. We define a sequence of 

nanneal temperature points {Tk}nanneal  

> k=0

, which follow a predefined schedule f (i) over the training steps i:

f (i) = 



Ti = T0, i ≤ nwarmup ,Ti = T0 − T0

nanneal 

 i − nwarmup 

neq 



, i > n warmup . (20) Here, nwarmup denotes the number of training steps in the warm-up stage, neq is the number of optimization steps performed at each temperature point. The total number of training steps is therefore Nsteps = nwarmup + neq nanneal .C Details of training neural networks 15 For larger systems, the temperature schedule is implemented via a non-uniform discretization of {Tk}, with logarith-mic spacing allocating more points near the low-temperature regime, followed by a linear refinement near the final temperature. For the 3D EA experiments, we modify this estimator as described in Eq. (10). Samples are first generated autoregressively from qθ and then refined by a short local Monte Carlo trajectory. The refined configurations are used in the gradient estimate, together with the additional likelihood term weighted by w. This procedure can be viewed as self-distillation: local Monte Carlo acts as a local teacher that maps the model samples toward nearby physically relevant configurations, and the likelihood term trains FlashVAN to increase the probability of those refined samples. This stabilizes low-temperature training while preserving the variational free-energy component of the objective.  

> 3. Comparison on optimizers

FlashVAN adopts the Muon optimizer [63], achieving accelerated convergence and superior accuracy on spin-glass tasks (Supplementary Figure 8). While the conventional Adam optimizer [64] ensures training stability via exponential moving averages of first and second moments, its isotropic scaling may not fully exploit the intrinsic geometry of transformer-based architectures. Specifically, weight matrices in these models often exhibit a low-rank structure, where parameter updates are concentrated along a few principal directions. Although second-order or natural-gradient methods [35, 65, 66] can theoretically address this directionality, they often rely on the estimation of a sample covariance matrix S. These approaches not only introduce sampling noise and numerical instability under data-limited regimes but also impose prohibitive computational and memory overhead [67]. Muon circumvents these limitations by explicitly orthogonalizing the momentum matrix via Newton-Schulz itera-tions, thereby refining the geometry of matrix-valued updates. Let Mt denote the momentum matrix at iteration t

(initialized M0 = 0) and Lt(W ) be the loss evaluated on the mini-batch. The updates are 

Mt = μM t−1 + ∇L t

 Wt−1

,Ot = Newton-Schulz( Mt),Wt = Wt−1 − ηtOt,

(21) where μ and ηt represent the momentum coefficient and the learning rate, respectively. Since Ot has the same shape as 

Mt, it provides a structured (approximately orthogonalized) direction for updating the corresponding weight matrix 

Wt. Crucially, the Newton-Schulz iteration relies solely on high-throughput operations, such as matrix addition and multiplication, thereby bypassing the sequential bottlenecks and numerical instability of singular value decomposition (SVD). In this work, we employ an augmented version of the Muon optimizer. Beyond the core orthogonalization step, we integrate weight decay to regularize the growth of parameter norms and implement RMS scale alignment to ensure consistent update magnitudes across disparate layer shapes [33]. A comprehensive comparison with standard optimizers is detailed in the Supplementary Information, Section III. 

Data availability: The authors declare that the data supporting this study are available within the paper. 

Code availability: . A PyTorch implementation of the present algorithm can be found at the GitHub repository, which will be publicly available upon the acceptance of the manuscript. 

> Acknowledgments

We thank Lei Wang, Yuliang Jin, Luciano Hugo Miranda Filho for their helpful communication. This work is sup-ported by Project 12322501, 12575035 of the National Natural Science Foundation of China, and 2026NSFSCZY0124 of the Natural Science Foundation of Sichuan Province. The computational work is supported by the Center for HPC, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. 

> Author contributions

Y.T., P.Z., J.L. had the original idea for this work. L.Z., W.D. and J.L. performed the study, and all authors contributed to the preparation of the manuscript. C Details of training neural networks 16 

Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

Additional information 

Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at [URL will be inserted by publisher]. 

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Ying Tang. 

Reprints and permission information is available online at [URL will be inserted by publisher]. 

[1] K. Binder and A. P. Young, Spin glasses: Experimental facts, theoretical concepts, and open questions, Rev. Mod. Phys. 

58 , 801 (1986). [2] M. M´ ezard, G. Parisi, N. Sourlas, G. Toulouse, and M. Virasoro, Nature of the spin-glass phase, Phys. Rev. Lett. 52 , 1156 (1984). [3] M. J. Schuetz, J. K. Brubaker, and H. G. Katzgraber, Combinatorial optimization with physics-inspired graph neural networks, Nat. Mach. Intell. 4, 367 (2022). [4] D. Sherrington and S. Kirkpatrick, 50 years of spin glass theory, Nat. Rev. Phys. 7, 528 (2025). [5] D. Sherrington and S. Kirkpatrick, Solvable model of a spin-glass, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35 , 1792 (1975). [6] S. F. Edwards and P. W. Anderson, Theory of spin glasses, J. Phys. F 5, 965 (1975). [7] K. Binder, D. W. Heermann, and K. Binder, Monte Carlo Simulation in Statistical Physics , Vol. 8 (Springer, 1992). [8] D. Wu, L. Wang, and P. Zhang, Solving statistical mechanics using variational autoregressive networks, Phys. Rev. Lett. 

122 , 080602 (2019). [9] P. Mehta, M. Bukov, C.-H. Wang, A. G. Day, C. Richardson, C. K. Fisher, and D. J. Schwab, A high-bias, low-variance introduction to machine learning for physicists, Phys. Rep. (2019). [10] B. McNaughton, M. V. Miloˇ sevi´ c, A. Perali, and S. Pilati, Boosting monte carlo simulations of spin glasses using autore-gressive neural networks, Phys. Rev. E 101 , 053312 (2020). [11] G. Carleo and M. Troyer, Solving the quantum many-body problem with artificial neural networks, Science 355 , 602 (2017). [12] G. Carleo, I. Cirac, K. Cranmer, L. Daudet, M. Schuld, N. Tishby, L. Vogt-Maranto, and L. Zdeborov´ a, Machine learning and the physical sciences, Rev. Mod. Phys. 91 , 045002 (2019). [13] M. Hibat-Allah, M. Ganahl, L. E. Hayward, R. G. Melko, and J. Carrasquilla, Recurrent neural network wave functions, Phys. Rev. Research 2, 023358 (2020). [14] T. Westerhout, N. Astrakhantsev, K. S. Tikhonov, M. I. Katsnelson, and A. A. Bagrov, Generalization properties of neural network approximations to frustrated magnet ground states, Nat. Commun. 11 , 1593 (2020). [15] D. Luo, Z. Chen, J. Carrasquilla, and B. K. Clark, Autoregressive neural network for simulating open quantum systems via a probabilistic formulation, Phys. Rev. Lett. 128 , 090501 (2022). [16] G. Carleo, K. Choo, D. Hofmann, J. E. Smith, T. Westerhout, F. Alet, E. J. Davis, S. Efthymiou, I. Glasser, S.-H. Lin, M. Mauri, G. Mazzola, C. B. Mendl, E. van Nieuwenburg, O. O’Reilly, H. Th´ eveniaut, G. Torlai, F. Vicentini, and A. Wietek, Netket: A machine learning toolkit for many-body quantum systems, SoftwareX 10 , 100311 (2019). [17] D. Wu, R. Rossi, F. Vicentini, N. Astrakhantsev, F. Becca, X. Cao, J. Carrasquilla, F. Ferrari, A. Georges, M. Hibat-Allah, M. Imada, A. M. L ˜A¤uchli, G. Mazzola, A. Mezzacapo, A. Millis, J. R. Moreno, T. Neupert, Y. Nomura, J. Nys, O. Parcollet, R. Pohle, I. Romero, M. Schmid, J. M. Silvester, S. Sorella, L. F. Tocchio, L. Wang, S. R. White, A. Wietek, Q. Yang, Y. Yang, S. Zhang, and G. Carleo, Variational benchmarks for quantum many-body problems, Science 386 , 296 (2024). [18] Y. Tang, J. Weng, and P. Zhang, Neural-network solutions to stochastic reaction networks, Nat. Mach. Intell. 5, 376 (2023). [19] Y. Tang, J. Liu, J. Zhang, and P. Zhang, Learning nonequilibrium statistical mechanics and dynamical phase transitions, Nat. Commun. 15 , 1117 (2024). [20] J. Weng, X. Zhu, J. Liu, L. L¨ u, P. Zhang, and Y. Tang, Tracking large chemical reaction networks and rare events by neural networks, arXiv:2512.10309 (2025). [21] M. Germain, K. Gregor, I. Murray, and H. Larochelle, Made: Masked autoencoder for distribution estimation, in Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 37, edited by F. Bach and D. Blei (PMLR, Lille, France, 2015) pp. 881–889. [22] H. Larochelle and I. Murray, The neural autoregressive distribution estimator, in Proceedings of the Fourteenth Interna-tional Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 15, edited by G. Gordon, D. Dunson, and M. Dud ˜Ak (PMLR, Fort Lauderdale, FL, USA, 2011) pp. 29–37. [23] B. Uria, M.-A. Cˆ ot´ e, K. Gregor, I. Murray, and H. Larochelle, Neural autoregressive distribution estimation, J. Mach. Learn. Res. 17 , 7184 (2016). C Details of training neural networks 17 

[24] S. Ciarella, J. Trinquier, M. Weigt, and F. Zamponi, Machine-learning-assisted monte carlo fails at sampling computation-ally hard problems, Mach. Learn. Sci. Technol. (2023). [25] L. M. Del Bono, F. Ricci-Tersenghi, and F. Zamponi, Nearest-neighbors neural network architecture for efficient sampling of statistical physics models, Mach. Learn. Sci. Technol. 6, 025029 (2025). [26] C. Fan, M. Shen, Z. Nussinov, Z. Liu, Y. Sun, and Y.-Y. Liu, Searching for spin glass ground states through deep reinforcement learning, Nat. Commun. 14 , 725 (2023). [27] S. Boettcher, Deep reinforced learning heuristic tested on spin-glass ground states: The larger picture, Nat. Commun. 14 ,5658 (2023). [28] C. Fan, M. Shen, Z. Nussinov, Z. Liu, Y. Sun, and Y.-Y. Liu, Reply to: Deep reinforced learning heuristic tested on spin-glass ground states: The larger picture, Nat. Commun. 14 , 5659 (2023). [29] J. Yuan, H. Gao, D. Dai, J. Luo, L. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. Wei, L. Wang, Z. Xiao, et al. , Native sparse attention: Hardware-aligned and natively trainable sparse attention, arXiv:2502.11089 (2025). [30] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, Attention is All You Need, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 30 (2017). [31] T. Dao, D. Y. Fu, S. Ermon, A. Rudra, and C. R´ e, FlashAttention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , NeurIPS 2022, Vol. 35 (2022) pp. 16344–16359. [32] J. Shah, G. Bikshandi, Y. Zhang, V. Thakkar, P. Ramani, and T. Dao, FlashAttention-3: Fast and accurate attention with asynchrony and low-precision, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 37, edited by A. Globerson, L. Mackey, D. Belgrave, A. Fan, U. Paquet, J. Tomczak, and C. Zhang (Curran Associates, Inc., 2024) pp. 68658–68685. [33] J. Liu, J. Su, X. Yao, Z. Jiang, G. Lai, Y. Du, Y. Qin, W. Xu, E. Lu, J. Yan, et al. , Muon is scalable for llm training, arXiv:2502.16982 (2025). [34] M. Hibat-Allah, E. M. Inack, R. Wiersema, R. G. Melko, and J. Carrasquilla, Variational neural annealing, Nat. Mach. Intell. 3, 952 (2021). [35] J. Liu, Y. Tang, and P. Zhang, Efficient optimization of variational autoregressive networks with natural gradient, Phys. Rev. E 111 , 025304 (2025). [36] I. Biazzo, D. Wu, and G. Carleo, Sparse autoregressive neural networks for classical spin systems, Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 5, 025074 (2024). [37] L. M. Del Bono, F. Ricci-Tersenghi, and F. Zamponi, Demonstrating real advantage of machine learning–enhanced monte carlo for combinatorial optimization, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 123 , e2534768123 (2026). [38] N. Bhattacharya, N. Thomas, R. Rao, J. Dauparas, P. K. Koo, D. Baker, Y. S. Song, and S. Ovchinnikov, Interpreting potts and transformer protein models through the lens of simplified attention, in Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 

(World Scientific, 2021) pp. 34–45. [39] R. Rende and L. L. Viteritti, Are queries and keys always relevant? a case study on transformer wave functions, Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 6, 010501 (2025). [40] M. Fr´ ıas-P´ erez, M. Mari¨ en, D. P. Garc´ ıa, M. C. Ba˜ nuls, and S. Iblisdir, Collective monte carlo updates through tensor network renormalization, SciPost Physics 14 , 123 (2023). [41] T. Chen, E. Guo, W. Zhang, P. Zhang, and Y. Deng, Tensor network monte carlo simulations for the two-dimensional random-bond ising model, Phys. Rev. B 111 , 094201 (2025). [42] T. Chen, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Deng, and P. Zhang, Batchtnmc: Efficient sampling of two-dimensional spin glasses using tensor network monte carlo, arXiv:2509.19006 (2025). [43] J. Su, M. Ahmed, Y. Lu, S. Pan, W. Bo, and Y. Liu, RoFormer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding, Neurocomput. 568 , 10.1016/j.neucom.2023.127063 (2024). [44] T. Dao, Flashattention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning, in International Conference on Learning Representations , Vol. 2024 (2024) pp. 35549–35562. [45] R. Rende, L. L. Viteritti, L. Bardone, F. Becca, and S. Goldt, A simple linear algebra identity to optimize large-scale neural network quantum states, Commun. Phys. 7, 260 (2024). [46] K. Sprague and S. Czischek, Variational monte carlo with large patched transformers, Commun. Phys. 7, 90 (2024). [47] A. Van de Walle, M. Schmitt, and A. Bohrdt, Many-body dynamics with explicitly time-dependent neural quantum states, Mach. Learn.: Sci. Technol. 6, 045011 (2025). [48] R. J. Williams, Simple statistical gradient-following algorithms for connectionist reinforcement learning, Mach. Learn. 8,229 (1992). [49] M. M´ ezard, G. Parisi, and M. A. Virasoro, Spin glass theory and beyond (World Scientific, Singapore, 1986). [50] M. Kac and J. C. Ward, A combinatorial solution of the two-dimensional ising model, Phys. Rev. 88 , 1332 (1952). [51] J. Charfreitag, M. J¨ unger, S. Mallach, and P. Mutzel, McSparse: Exact solutions of sparse maximum cut and sparse unconstrained binary quadratic optimization problems, in 2022 Proceedings of the Symposium on Algorithm Engineering and Experiments (ALENEX) (2022) pp. 54–66. [52] P. Bialas, P. Korcyl, T. Stebel, A. Stefa´ nski, and D. Zapolski, Sampling two-dimensional spin systems with transformers, arXiv:2604.27738 (2026). [53] F. Rom ˜A¡, S. Risau-Gusman, A. Ramirez-Pastor, F. Nieto, and E. Vogel, The ground state energy of the edwards-anderson spin glass model with a parallel tempering monte carlo algorithm, Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications 

388 , 2821 (2009). [54] S.-J. Ran, E. Tirrito, C. Peng, X. Chen, L. Tagliacozzo, G. Su, and M. Lewenstein, Tensor Network Contractions: Methods and Applications to Quantum Many-Body Systems (Springer Nature, 2020). C Details of training neural networks 18 

[55] T. Chen, J. Liu, Y. Deng, and P. Zhang, Tensor network markov chain monte carlo: Efficient sampling of three-dimensional spin glasses and beyond, arXiv:2509.23945 (2025). [56] C. Chilin, E. Marinari, V. Mart´ ın-Mayor, G. Parisi, J. J. Ruiz-Lorenzo, and D. Yllanes, On the true low-energy excitations of the three-dimensional spin glass, arXiv:2606.07197 (2026). [57] F. Ritort and P. Sollich, Glassy dynamics of kinetically constrained models, Adv. Phys. 52 , 219 (2003). [58] H.-J. Zhou, K-core attack, equilibrium k-core, and kinetically constrained spin system, Chin. Phys. B 33 , 066402 (2024). [59] A. Kazemnejad, I. Padhi, K. Natesan Ramamurthy, P. Das, and S. Reddy, The impact of positional encoding on length gen-eralization in transformers, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 36, edited by A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine (Curran Associates, Inc., 2023) pp. 24892–24928. [60] M. Milakov and N. Gimelshein, Online normalizer calculation for softmax, arXiv preprint arXiv:1805.02867 (2018). [61] R. Pope, S. Douglas, A. Chowdhery, J. Devlin, J. Bradbury, J. Heek, K. Xiao, S. Agrawal, and J. Dean, Efficiently scaling transformer inference, in Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems , Vol. 5, edited by D. Song, M. Carbin, and T. Chen (Curan, 2023) pp. 606–624. [62] W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. Gonzalez, H. Zhang, and I. Stoica, Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention, in Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles , SOSP ’23 (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2023) pp. 611–626. [63] K. Jordan, Y. Jin, V. Boza, et al. , Muon: An optimizer for hidden layers in neural networks, https://kellerjordan. github.io/posts/muon/ (2024). [64] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, arXiv:1412.6980 (2014). [65] S.-i. Amari, Natural gradient works efficiently in learning, Neural Comput. 10 , 251 (1998). [66] J. Martens and R. Grosse, Optimizing neural networks with kronecker-factored approximate curvature, in Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 37, edited by F. Bach and D. Blei (PMLR, Lille, France, 2015) pp. 2408–2417. [67] F. Kunstner, P. Hennig, and L. Balles, Limitations of the empirical fisher approximation for natural gradient descent, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 32, edited by H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, A. Beygelzimer, F. d 'Alch´ e-Buc, E. Fox, and R. Garnett (Curran Associates, Inc., 2019). Supplementary Information: Scalable Physics-Inspired Transformers for Spin Glasses 

> CONTENTS

I. Model and architecture details 2A. From the ordered Markov boundary to physics-inspired sparse attention 2B. Positional encodings: concatenated PE vs. additive PE 3C. Local Monte Carlo with self-distillation 4D. Model configurations and training settings 5II. Hardware and implementation details 6A. Hardware and software environment 6B. FlashAttention vs. naive attention: runtime and sequence length effects 7III. Optimizer comparison 8A. Adam, natural-gradient descent, and Muon 8B. Learning-rate grids, warmup schedules, and cosine decay settings 10 IV. Comparison with classical baselines 11 A. Configurations for MADE 11 B. Comparison of accuracy and wall-clock time 13 References 14 2The Supplementary Information provides technical specifications, experimental protocols, and additional analyses to support reproducibility. Section I describes the model architecture, including the physics-inspired sparse attention mechanism derived from the ordered Markov boundary, positional encoding strategies, and the self-distilled local Monte Carlo training scheme. Section II presents hardware and implementation details, with emphasis on the runtime characteristics and scaling behavior of FlashAttention-2 [1]. Section III examines optimization strategies and their associated learning-rate schedules. Section IV compares the proposed method with classical baselines, evaluating both predictive accuracy and computational cost.   

> I. MODEL AND ARCHITECTURE DETAILS A. From the ordered Markov boundary to physics-inspired sparse attention

Based on the theoretical guarantee of autoregressive screening (main text, Section IV A1), we now map the concept of the ordered Markov boundary ∂≺(i) to the concrete architectural design of our transformer model. Consider a 

D-dimensional lattice of linear size L containing N = LD spins. When processed by a decoder-only transformer, the 

D-dimensional spatial structure is flattened into a 1D sequence using an ordering ≺, such as a standard raster scan ordering. As established, predicting σi requires only the spins within ∂≺(i). Physically, this ordered Markov boundary represents the topological frontier that separates the sampled region Pi from the unsampled region Fi. Because interactions in the Ising Hamiltonian are local, the “fill-edges” generated by marginalizing the future spins Fi only propagate along this physical frontier. Consequently, the boundary ∂≺(i) comprises a cross-sectional cut of the lattice. For a 2D lattice, this cut consists of roughly L spins corresponding to the current row and the immediately preceding row. In fact, the maximum index distance dmax is strictly bounded by: dmax = max j∈∂≺(i)(i − j) = O(LD−1). For a 1D system, dmax = 1 , for a 2D system, dmax = O(L), and for a 3D system, dmax = O(L2). Thus, all necessary information to exactly compute P (σi | σPi ) is completely contained within a local 1D sequence window of this size. The standard full causal attention calculates an attention matrix Aij for all past tokens j ≺ i, incurring an O(N 2)

computational overhead. While a fully connected transformer might theoretically learn that attention weights should decay such that Aij → 0 for j < i − dmax , forcing the model to infer this structural decay is inefficient and risks capturing spurious, unphysical long-range correlations. Motivated by these observations and the localization properties of the system, our physics-inspired sparse attention explicitly incorporates the constraints into the model architecture. By applying a sliding window attention mask of width W ≥ dmax , we enforce a strict structural sparsity: 

Aij = 0 for i − j > W (S1) This theoretically grounded truncation reduces the attention complexity from O(N 2) to O(N W ). Crucially, this banded sparsity pattern aligns well with hardware-optimized kernels, such as FlashAttention, enabling the massive a b

Figure 1: Runtime comparison between physics-inspired sparse attention and full causal attention. (a) Autoregressive sampling runtime and (b) log-probability evaluation and backward pass runtime as a function of sequence length, for sparse attention and full causal attention. B Positional encodings: concatenated PE vs. additive PE 3

Figure 2: Effect of sparse attention on the overlap distribution p(q). Comparison between sparse attention and full causal attention in FlashVAN for four disorder instances at temperature T = 0 .31 . Both variants accurately reproduce the multi-peaked structure of p(q) and show close agreement with the Kac-Ward solution [ 2] and parallel tempering (PT). acceleration required to scale physical simulations to previously inaccessible lattice sizes. This alignment enables both computational efficiency and physical fidelity, which we validate through numerical experiments. We first examine the computational scaling on the 1D Ising model. For long sequences ( L > 4096 ), full attention becomes computationally prohibitive, whereas sparse attention scales efficiently with the window size (Supplementary Fig. 1). We then evaluate the physical accuracy on the 2D Edwards–Anderson (EA) model via the overlap distribution 

p(q). As shown in Supplementary Fig. 2, sparse attention closely matches full causal attention and reference methods, accurately reproducing the multi-peaked structure of p(q) across different disorder instances.  

> B. Positional encodings: concatenated PE vs. additive PE

To evaluate positional encodings, we compare concatenated positional embeddings (concatenated PE), which FlashVAN uses by default, with additive positional embeddings (Add PE) in three controlled experiments; the experimental traces appear in Supplementary Figures 3–5. All comparisons keep the model architecture and training hyperparameters identical; only the form of the positional encoding or the token/position embedding split is varied. When the total embedding dimension dmodel is fixed, the allocation between token and positional components strongly affects performance at large system sizes, as illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 3. For small systems (for example 

N = 30 , dmodel = 32 ), free-energy convergence is largely insensitive to the position-to-token ratio; by contrast, for large systems (for example N = 256 , dmodel = 256 ), configurations that allocate excessive capacity to token embeddings exhibit degraded convergence and higher final free energy. Given the binary nature of the spin variables, a minimal token embedding ( dtoken = 2 ) suffices in practice (in the absence of patching) and frees capacity for positional encoding as system size grows. B Positional encodings: concatenated PE vs. additive PE 4In addition to allocation effects, concatenated PE yields more stable training trajectories and modestly faster convergence than Add PE, with this advantage most pronounced in low-temperature regimes where Add PE can exhibit oscillatory behavior (Supplementary Fig. 4). Evaluation of learned distributions via the overlap p(q) on hard 2D EA instances shows that, when training converges, both schemes recover the correct multi-modal structure and match reference methods (Kac-Ward formula [2], PT [3]), as shown in Supplementary Fig. 5. Based on these empirical findings, we recommend allocating minimal dimensionality to token embeddings for binary spins (e.g. dtoken = 2 ) and using concatenated PE for improved stability and scalability to large system sizes. a

b

Figure 3: Effect of the positional-to-token embedding ratio on free energy convergence. The total em-bedding dimension dmodel is held constant, and Ratio is defined as dpos /d token . (a) Free-energy convergence trajec-tories for the SK model at system size N = 30 under different Ratio values. (b) Corresponding results for N = 256 .Columns correspond to different random seeds.  

> C. Local Monte Carlo with self-distillation

To further clarify the origin of FlashVAN’s strong performance in the 3D EA model, we perform an ablation study of the overlap distribution p(q) at four representative temperatures, T = 1 .92 , 0.77 , 0.29 , and 0.10 . The gray histogram denotes the equilibrium reference distribution obtained from PT. The three columns compare different training strategies within FlashVAN: LMC with self-distillation, LMC without self-distillation, and a baseline variant in which both LMC updates and self-distillation are removed. As shown in Fig. 6, the closest agreement with the PT reference is obtained only when both LMC and self-distillation are included. In this case, FlashVAN reproduces the overlap distribution consistently across the full temperature range, including the low-temperature regime where the distribution becomes highly structured and difficult to learn. When self-distillation is removed while retaining LMC updates, visible deviations from the PT benchmark already appear, especially at lower temperatures. When both LMC and self-distillation are removed, the discrepancy becomes even more pronounced, and the learned distribution fails to correctly capture the overall structure of the PT reference. These results show that the performance reported in the main text relies crucially on the improved training strategy rather than on the model architecture alone. The two ingredients play complementary roles. The short LMC procedure refines the generated configurations before evaluating the loss and therefore provides a more physically informed C Local Monte Carlo with self-distillation 5c

a b

Figure 4: Comparison of two absolute positional-embedding (PE) schemes. Green and red denote Add PE and concatenated PE, respectively; dashed lines indicate reference energies. (a) Free-energy convergence trajectories for the Sherrington–Kirkpatrick (SK) model at N = 20 under a fixed random seed, shown for inverse temperatures 

β = 1 , 2.5, 4, 5. (b) Free-energy convergence for the SK model at N = 256 at β = 0 .5. (c) Energy convergence during ground-state search in the 2D EA model. training signal. In this sense, LMC serves as a strong teacher that guides the model toward physically relevant configurations. At the same time, the additional self-distillation term stabilizes training by encouraging the model to assign higher probability to these refined samples, thereby counterbalancing the tendency of the original objective to collapse onto a limited set of modes, particularly at low temperatures. Together, these two ingredients constitute a self-distillation-based training strategy that is essential for stabilizing learning and for enabling FlashVAN to recover the correct overlap distribution in the challenging low-temperature regime. For all results shown in Fig. 6, we use the same model architecture, with nlayers = 2 , dtoken = 64 , dpos = 192 ,

nheads = 2 , and patch size (2 , 2, 2) . Each model is trained for a total of 7000 steps. At the highest temperature 

T = 1 .92 , the model is trained directly at the target temperature without annealing. For the lower temperatures 

T = 0 .77 , 0.29 , and 0.10 , we use an annealing schedule consisting of 5000 warmup steps at T = 1 .92 , followed by 2000 training steps while annealing to the target temperature.  

> D. Model configurations and training settings

This section lists the model definitions used in our experiments, the default hyperparameter settings, and the methods for measuring parameter counts and training time. It also provides details on the concrete configurations and training durations for different system sizes (Supplementary Tables 1–5). Symbols used throughout are defined in Supplementary Table 1. Default FlashVAN settings are listed in Supple-mentary Table 2; typical values include nlayers = 2 , nheads = 4 , dtoken = 2 , the Muon optimizer [ 4] with η = 10 −3, a cosine-decay learning-rate schedule with 300 warmup steps, and the annealing protocol reported in the table. For the EA model, the input spin configuration on an LD lattice is partitioned into non-overlapping patches of size 2D . Each patch is mapped to a token, reducing the input sequence length from LD to (L/ 2) D , thereby improving computational efficiency. To extend the approach to larger 2D EA systems ( L ≥ 48 ), we adopt an extended configuration to improve scalability while maintaining a comparable parameter count. Specifically, a 2 × 2 patching scheme is used, increasing the token dimension from dtoken = 2 to 16 , and enabling a more efficient representation of local spin configurations. In addition, D Model configurations and training settings 6

Figure 5: Comparison of Add and concatenated positional embeddings via the overlap distribution 

p(q). Curves show p(q) for four disorder instances at temperature T = 0 .31 . Kac-Ward formula and PT are in-cluded as reference distributions. the loss function incorporates both a reverse-KL-driven exploration term and a likelihood-based regularization term, as defined in Eq. (10). To further stabilize training at larger scales, we employ a two-stage procedure. An initial warm-up phase follows the standard FlashVAN setting, after which an annealing phase is performed using FlashVAN with 2D rotary positional encoding (RoPE) [ 5]. This design enables scaling to system sizes up to L = 60 without a substantial increase in the number of trainable parameters. Wall-clock timings in Supplementary Tables 3–5 follow a consistent protocol. The per-step time reports the average elapsed time for a single training step (forward pass, backward pass, and parameter update), while the total training time is measured from the start of training until completion on the GPU, excluding initialization and model-loading time. All timing experiments were repeated under the hardware environment specified in Supplementary Section II A.   

> II. HARDWARE AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS A. Hardware and software environment

All experiments are conducted on a single NVIDIA H100 GPU (80 GB). To ensure reproducibility, we maintain a consistent software stack featuring Python 3.11, PyTorch 2.8.0, and FlashAttention v2. Mixed precision is strategically employed: attention kernels operate in FP16, whereas embeddings, feed-forward layers, and parameter updates remain in FP32 to strike a balance between throughput and numerical stability. Detailed environment specifications, including exact package builds and random seeds, are provided in our repository. A Hardware and software environment 70.0 

5.0   

> p(q)
> T = 1.92
> LMC with self-distillation LMC without self-distillation Baseline

0.0 

2.0 

> p(q)
> T = 0.77

0.0 

2.0 

> p(q)
> T = 0.29

1 0 1

> q

0.0 

10.0 

> p(q)
> T = 0.10

1 0 1

> q

1 0 1

> q

Figure 6: Ablation study for the overlap distribution p(q) in the 3D EA model at L = 10 . The gray histogram denotes the PT reference. From left to right: FlashVAN trained with both LMC updates and self-distillation, with LMC only, and with neither LMC nor self-distillation. Rows are at temperatures T = 1 .92 , 0.77 ,

0.29 , and 0.10 . 

> B. FlashAttention vs. naive attention: runtime and sequence length effects

FlashAttention substantially mitigates the runtime and memory overheads of transformer-based sampling for long sequences. We benchmark our FlashVAN against a baseline transformer-based VAN (transformer-VAN) that utilizes PyTorch’s naive attention implementation, which recomputes the full attention matrix at each generation step. In contrast, FlashVAN integrates FlashAttention kernels with a KV cache for efficient autoregressive sampling. Per-step runtimes are averaged over 500 training steps, with peak memory consumption recorded during the process (Supplementary Fig. 7). The computational complexity of a single full self-attention evaluation is O(N 2d), where N is the sequence length and 

d = dmodel is the hidden dimension. If autoregressive sampling naively recomputes all attention scores at each of the N

generation steps, the end-to-end sampling cost becomes O(N 3d). FlashAttention does not alter these asymptotic costs for a single full attention evaluation, but its fused CUDA kernels and careful exploitation of on-chip memory greatly reduce memory traffic and constant factors, yielding substantial wall-clock speedups for the attention computation itself. More importantly for sampling, FlashVAN combines FlashAttention with a KV cache so that key/value tensors computed for past positions are reused rather than recomputed. In practice, this reduces the sampling complexity from 

O(N 3d) to O(N 2d). The empirical traces in Supplementary Fig. 7a show that FlashVAN achieves substantially lower per-step runtime than the transformer-VAN baseline as sequence length increases, with differences growing rapidly for longer sequences. Peak memory traces in Supplementary Fig. 7b likewise show that FlashVAN uses less device memory than the naive implementation, although both implementations display steeply increasing memory demands with sequence length. B FlashAttention vs. naive attention: runtime and sequence length effects 8Table 1: Definition of symbols used for model architecture and training hyperparameters. 

Symbol Description 

nlayers Number of layers 

nheads Number of attention heads 

dtoken Token embedding dimension 

dpos Positional embedding dimension 

dmodel Total per-token embedding dimension, dmodel = dtoken + dpos 

nwarmup Number of warm-up (high-temperature) training steps 

nanneal Number of temperature points during the annealing phase 

neq Number of training steps per linear annealing temperature level 

Nbatch Batch size 

η Learning rate 

Np Number of trainable parameters 

Table 2: General model and training settings for FlashVAN experiments. The annealing strategy is applied when searching for ground-state energies. 

Category Parameter Default value Model Architecture FlashVAN 

nlayers 2

nheads 4

dtoken 2

Training Optimizer Muon Learning rate η = 10 −3

Learning rate scheduler Cosine decay, 300 warmup steps Annealing strategy nwarmup = 1200 , n anneal = 500 , n eq = 5 

Nbatch 1024 

Nsteps 4000 

III. OPTIMIZER COMPARISON A. Adam, natural-gradient descent, and Muon 

We conduct a systematic comparison of three optimizer classes: first-order Adam [ 6], first-order Muon, and a quasi-second-order improved natural-gradient (NG) method [ 7] on two tasks: free-energy estimation for the Sherrington– Kirkpatrick (SK) model with N = 30 and ground-state energy search for the 2D EA model. For the SK model ( N = 30 ;93,642 trainable parameters), a logarithmically spaced grid search identifies the optimal learning rates as 10 −3 for Adam, 10 −3 for Muon, and 10 −2 for the NG method. Exact free energies across a range of inverse temperatures β are computed by enumeration and used as reference. As shown in Supplementary Fig. 8a, all three optimizers achieve consistently low relative free-energy errors (below 10 −3), with Muon producing the smallest relative error at most temperature points. We extend the ground-state search procedure across multiple model scales for the 2D EA task. For intermediate-scale configurations (373,680 trainable parameters), the optimal learning rates are identified as 10 −3 for Adam, 10 −2 for Muon, and 10 −1 for the NG method. In Supplementary Fig. 8b, dashed lines represent reference ground-state energies sourced from a public online server [ 8]. At the larger scale (1,513,478 trainable parameters), the optimal learning rate shifts to 10 −3 for both Adam and Muon, as illustrated in Supplementary Fig. 8c. A Adam, natural-gradient descent, and Muon 9Table 3: Hyperparameters and wall-clock training time of FlashVAN on the SK model at different system sizes N .

Parameter N = 30 N = 64 N = 128 N = 256 

dpos 62 62 126 254 

nheads 2 2 4 4Wall-clock time per training step 0.020 s 0.036 s 0.090 s 0.300 s 

Total wall-clock training time 1.320 min 2 .387 min 5 .980 min 19 .847 min 

Table 4: Hyperparameters and wall-clock training time of FlashVAN on the 2D EA model for different system sizes 

L, with nlayers = 2 for all cases. 

Parameter L = 8 L = 16 L = 24 L = 32 L = 48 L = 60 

dpos 62 126 254 318 144 176 

dtoken 2 2 2 2 16 16 

nheads 2 4 4 4 4 4

nwarmup 2000 2000 3000 3200 4500 4500 

nanneal 100 120 220 240 2000 2000 

neq 5 5 5 5 0 0

Nbatch 1024 1024 1024 1024 2048 2048 Wall-clock time per training step 0.014 s 0.049 s 0.224 s 0.382 s 1.273 s 2.596 s 

Total wall-clock training time 0.581 min 2 .182 min 11 .766 min 28 .337 min 3 .000 h 4 .830 h 

Natural-gradient methods approximate second-order information and can accelerate convergence, but naive imple-mentations require inverting an Np × Np matrix, with cubic time scaling in the number of parameters. The variant of NG used in this work circumvents this bottleneck by approximating the parameter-space inverse with an inversion carried out at the batch level (i.e., an Nbatch × Nbatch matrix), thereby shifting the computational dependence from model dimensionality to batch size. This approach requires computing per-sample gradients and assembling batchwise matrices at each optimization step, which increases memory usage. Even so, as system size grows, the storage and construction of per-sample gradients cause rapidly increasing memory demands, even for fixed Nbatch . This remains a practical limitation of the method. Taken together, Adam provides a computationally inexpensive and reliable baseline; the improved NG offers faster Table 5: Hyperparameters and wall-clock training time of FlashVAN on the 3D EA model for different system sizes 

L.

Parameter L = 4 L = 6 L = 8 L = 10 L = 14 L = 16 

dpos 30 126 124 96 192 192 

dtoken 2 2 4 32 64 64 

nheads 2 2 2 2 2 2

nlayers 3 3 3 2 2 2

nwarmup 2000 2000 10000 5000 5000 5000 

nanneal 100 100 300 2000 2000 2100 

neq 5 5 5 0 0 0

Nbatch 1024 1024 2048 2048 2048 2048 Wall-clock time per training step 0.028 s 0 .052 s 0 .132 s 0 .179 s 0.819 s 1.290 s B Learning-rate grids, warmup schedules, and cosine decay settings 10 a b

> 36x

Figure 7: Performance comparison between the transformer-based VAN (purple) and FlashVAN (green). (a) Mean per-step runtime for the combined forward and backward pass, averaged over 500 steps. (b) Peak GPU memory usage during training. a b c

Figure 8: Effect of optimizer choice on training convergence. Dashed lines indicate reference energies. (a) Relative free energy error |f − fexact | / |fexact | for the SK model (N = 30) as a function of inverse temperature β;the inset shows the standard deviation σ(f ). Green, purple and pink curves denote the Muon, NG and Adam opti-mizers, respectively. (b) Energy convergence per site for the 2D EA model at L = 16 . (c) Free-energy convergence for the SK model at N = 256 . Under identical training and model configurations, NG could not be run at this scale due to GPU memory limitations. convergence and higher final accuracy but is constrained by increased memory and computational overhead; and Muon delivers the best trade-off in our experiments, achieving faster convergence and lower relative errors.  

> B. Learning-rate grids, warmup schedules, and cosine decay settings

For a fair comparison across optimizers, we conduct a systematic, logarithmically spaced grid search over initial learning rates, typically spanning 10 −4 to 10 −1. Final choices are made by inspecting task-specific convergence and numerical stability (optimal values are reported above in Section III A). We adopt a two-stage learning-rate schedule consisting of an initial linear warmup followed by cosine annealing to enhance both training stability and final performance. Specifically, the learning rate is ramped linearly from 10 −5 to 10 −3

over the first 300 steps using LinearLR, after which CosineAnnealingLR is applied with Tmax = 2700 and ηmin = 10 −5.If training proceeds beyond Tmax , the learning rate is maintained at ηmin . In fixed-temperature SK training, this warmup-plus-cosine schedule produces a small but consistent improvement in final accuracy (Supplementary Fig. 9a). In that panel, dashed lines correspond to runs employing warmup plus cosine decay, while solid lines denote fixed-learning-rate runs, illustrating that the two-stage schedule aids in obtaining more accurate free-energy estimates in this regime. B Learning-rate grids, warmup schedules, and cosine decay settings 11 a b c

Figure 9: Impact of learning rate scheduler on training convergence and accuracy. All panels compare a fixed learning rate of 1 × 10 −3 with a cosine learning rate scheduler using a warm-up phase of 300 steps. (a) Free-energy convergence for the SK model, showing training trajectories for N = 64 , 128 , 256 approaching the exact thermodynamic-limit value N → ∞ . (b) Energy convergence per site for the 2D EA model at L = 32 . (c) Residual energy per site as a function of system size L, comparing PBC and OBC. 

> perfectly aligns

However, in the ground-state energy search task for the 2D EA model (Supplementary Figs. 9b and 9c), the same warmup-plus-cosine learning-rate schedule instead leads to degraded accuracy. We hypothesize that this effect is related to changes in temperature (inverse temperature β) during training: under an annealing protocol, each temperature decrease alters the target distribution, making the target distribution both sharper and shifted in location. The optimizer therefore needs to adjust parameters rapidly after each temperature change in order to track the new peaks. As the learning rate decreases monotonically during training, the optimizer may become overly conservative, making step sizes too small at critical moments and hindering fast convergence to new peaks. This issue is particularly pronounced in our setup, where we train for only five steps at each temperature and thus leave very little time for the optimizer to adapt. As a result, a globally monotone-decreasing learning-rate schedule often becomes too small at crucial moments, preventing the model from tracking the rapid changes in the target distribution and thereby reducing ground-state search accuracy. Based on these observations, we adopt the following practical recommendations for experiments. For fixed-temperature convergence tasks (for example, free-energy estimation of the SK model at fixed β), we recommend using a warmup-plus-cosine learning-rate schedule to improve final accuracy. By contrast, for ground-state search tasks that involve rapid temperature changes, we recommend caution when using a globally monotone-decreasing learning-rate schedule. Instead, consider more conservative or piecewise strategies.   

> IV. COMPARISON WITH CLASSICAL BASELINES A. Configurations for MADE

The Masked Autoencoder for Distribution Estimator (MADE) [ 9] utilizes a purely feedforward architecture featuring masked fully connected layers to enforce an autoregressive property. Specifically, for any node j in layer l and node i

in the subsequent layer l + 1 , the connection weight W lij is constrained when i ≥ j, ensuring that each output depends only on previously generated variables. Owing to its architectural simplicity, the computational cost of MADE scales linearly with system size L, whereas its parameter count grows quadratically with network width and depth, as shown in Supplementary Table 6. To enable training of larger systems on a single accelerator, we introduce patching in several configurations by partitioning spins into local blocks and modeling each block, thereby reducing the parameter count by roughly an order of magnitude in many settings. However, MADE’s reliance on localized representations and the lack of a global information-aggregation mechanism limit its ability to capture hierarchical structures in high-dimensional systems. Consequently, gains in parameter efficiency do not necessarily yield preserved representational capacity or accuracy. A Configurations for MADE 12 Table 6: Trainable parameter statistics of MADE. 

System size Net depth Net width Parameters (w/ patch) Parameters (w/o patch) L = 8 1 1 4 096 4 096 2 1 4 368 8 256 2 4 17 472 33 024 2 8 34 944 66 048 2 16 69 888 132 096 3 4 25 728 164 352 L = 32 1 1 1 048 576 1 048 576 2 4 4 457 472 8 392 704 2 16 17 829 888 33 570 816 2 32 35 659 776 –3 4 6 555 648 –

Table 7: Trainable parameter statistics of FlashVAN. 

System size dpos nheads Parameters (w/ patch) Parameters (w/o patch) L = 8 14 1 6 544 6 950 30 1 24 336 25 286 62 4 93 712 95 750 94 8 208 144 211 270 L = 32 126 1 397 872 –254 4 1 517 104 –318 16 2 347 056 –a b

Figure 10: Benchmarking the accuracy of MADE and FlashVAN on the 2D EA model. Panels (a) and (b) show the residual energy per site as a function of the number of trainable parameters. Each data point is aver-aged over five disorder instances. (a) System size L = 8 . (b) System size L = 32 .A Configurations for MADE 13 a b

Figure 11: Comparison of wall-clock training efficiency between MADE and FlashVAN. Panels (a) and (b) show the wall-clock time per training step as a function of the number of trainable parameters for system sizes 

L = 8 and L = 32 , respectively. Each data point is averaged over 1,000 training steps.  

> B. Comparison of accuracy and wall-clock time

For the 2D EA ground-state estimation task, we evaluate both convergence accuracy and computational cost for MADE and FlashVAN. Supplementary Fig. 10 presents the relative error between estimated and exact energies, averaged over five disorder instances, as a function of the number of trainable parameters. At L = 8 , FlashVAN attains an extremely low relative error ( ≈ 10 −6), retaining high precision even under patching configurations. In contrast, MADE achieves comparable accuracy only in its unpatched form; once patched, its error deteriorates to 

10 −1, indicating that input compression degrades its ability to preserve key information. This limitation becomes more pronounced at L = 32 : despite scaling to tens of millions of parameters, MADE fails to reach low-error solutions and is consistently outperformed by FlashVAN in both patched and unpatched regimes. Supplementary Fig. 11 reports wall-clock metrics. Due to attention overhead, FlashVAN exhibits a slightly higher per-step time than MADE at equal parameter scales (the difference is on the order of 0.03 seconds per step). Crucially, FlashVAN’s patching strategy reduces total parameter counts and overall training time while maintaining accuracy, delivering a better time-accuracy trade-off in medium-to-large problems such as L = 32 . In summary, MADE offers attractive theoretical scaling but is limited by representational constraints in large-scale settings; FlashVAN’s combination of expressive attention and efficient compression yields superior practical scalability and final performance. B Comparison of accuracy and wall-clock time 14 

[1] T. Dao, Flashattention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning, in International Conference on Learning Representations , Vol. 2024 (2024) pp. 35549–35562. [2] M. Kac and J. C. Ward, A combinatorial solution of the two-dimensional ising model, Phys. Rev. 88 , 1332 (1952). [3] E. Marinari and G. Parisi, Simulated tempering: a new monte carlo scheme, Europhys. Lett. 19 , 451 (1992). [4] J. Liu, J. Su, X. Yao, Z. Jiang, G. Lai, Y. Du, Y. Qin, W. Xu, E. Lu, J. Yan, et al. , Muon is scalable for llm training, arXiv:2502.16982 (2025). [5] J. Su, M. Ahmed, Y. Lu, S. Pan, W. Bo, and Y. Liu, RoFormer: Enhanced transformer with rotary position embedding, Neurocomput. 568 , 10.1016/j.neucom.2023.127063 (2024). [6] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization, arXiv:1412.6980 (2014). [7] J. Liu, Y. Tang, and P. Zhang, Efficient optimization of variational autoregressive networks with natural gradient, Phys. Rev. E 111 , 025304 (2025). [8] McSparse, University of Bonn, Format descriptions — McSparse, http://mcsparse.uni-bonn.de/mcgroundstate/formats .html (2026), accessed 15 Jan 2026. [9] M. Germain, K. Gregor, I. Murray, and H. Larochelle, Made: Masked autoencoder for distribution estimation, in Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine Learning , Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 37, edited by F. Bach and D. Blei (PMLR, Lille, France, 2015) pp. 881–889.