Title: Physics-conforming Latent Twins

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.15053v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 00:26:47 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
# Physics-Conforming Latent Twins 

# Matthias Chung 1* , Yutong Bu 1† and Deepanshu Verma 2†

> 1*

Department of Mathematics, Emory University, 400 Dowman Drive, Atlanta, 30322, GA, USA. 

> 2

School of Mathematical and Statistical Sciences, Clemson University, 220 Parkway Drive, Clemson, 29634, South Carolina, USA. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): matthias.chung@emory.edu; Contributing authors: audrey.bu@emory.edu; dverma@clemson.edu; 

> †

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

Abstract 

Surrogate models are central to scientific machine learning, where they enable fast prediction, simulation, inference, and control for complex physical systems. For time-dependent problems, however, accurate interpolation of training trajecto-ries is not sufficient: reliable surrogates should also respect the conservation laws, invariants, admissibility conditions, and dissipative structures that give those trajectories physical meaning. We introduce Physics-conforming Latent Twins, a framework for learning latent surrogate solution operators whose dynamics sat-isfy selected physical principles by design. The method builds on the Latent Twin formulation by jointly learning an encoder, a decoder, and a latent flow map between arbitrary time-indexed states, while constraining the latent dynamics to preserve or dissipate prescribed structural quantities. We develop a constraint-transfer viewpoint that connects physical structure in the original state space with compatible constraints in latent space, and prove structure-preservation bounds showing how latent enforcement improves control of physical defects after decoding. We also derive algebraic conditions for latent flow maps that pre-serve linear and quadratic invariants or enforce dissipative inequalities. Numerical experiments on representative ODE and PDE benchmarks demonstrate improved constraint satisfaction, structural fidelity, and qualitative long-time behavior while maintaining accurate surrogate prediction. 

Keywords: Scientific machine learning; physics-informed learning; latent dynamics; structure-preserving surrogate modeling; autoencoders; reduced-order modeling; dynamical systems; operator learning 

1

> arXiv:2606.15053v1 [cs.LG] 13 Jun 2026

# 1 Introduction 

The promise of scientific machine learning is not merely to accelerate simulation, but to learn models that retain the organizing structure of the physical world. Time-dependent physical systems are governed by more than input-output correlations: they obey conservation laws, preserve invariants, remain within admissible states, and often reflect underlying symmetries or geometric structure. When learned surrogates ignore these principles, they may interpolate data well while losing the properties that make scientific predictions reliable under extrapolation, long-time simulations, and other downstream use. This motivates a central question: how can we learn surrogate solution operators whose dynamics are accurate, efficient, and physically meaningful by design? In this work, we emphasize a structure-aware viewpoint on scientific machine learn-ing: conservation, symmetry, invariance, admissibility, and dissipation are not merely consequences of a particular system of governing equations; they are underlying struc-tural principles that delimit the space of physically admissible evolutions. From this perspective, governing equations are expressions of deeper organizing principles, rather than the sole source of physical structure. We therefore seek surrogate models that do more than imitate simulated trajectories: their learned dynamics are restricted by the principles that give those trajectories physical meaning. This viewpoint is aligned with a recurring theme in applied mathematics and physics: an appropriate representation can reveal structure that is hidden in the orig-inal variables. Noether’s theorem is a classical example, identifying conservation laws as consequences of continuous symmetries of the action rather than as isolated prop-erties of particular equations [1, 2]. A surrogate model that encodes this structural viewpoint directly, constraining its latent dynamics to respect the organizing principles of the physical system, may be called physics-conforming. Physics-conforming Latent Twins pursue this goal by using the latent space not merely for compression, but as the space in which selected physical structures are encoded and propagated by design. The Latent Twins framework was introduced in [3] and jointly learns (i) an encoder–decoder mapping high-dimensional states to a latent representation, and (ii) a latent solution operator that propagates states between arbitrary times s, t . Building upon this foundation, we introduce structured latent flow maps that satisfy selected physical principles, including conservation laws, quadratic invariants, and dissipa-tive inequalities, thereby enabling physics-conforming surrogate dynamics. This places our approach within the operator learning viewpoint: rather than learning one-step updates or vector fields, we learn mappings of the form u(s) 7 → u(t). The latent space is learned jointly with the dynamics so that the resulting representation admits surrogate evolution satisfying the prescribed physical laws. Among the many surrogate modeling approaches developed in scientific machine learning, reduced-order models, Koopman methods, neural operators, physics-informed networks, and latent representation learning, reviewed in Section 2.1, approaches differ in the mathematical object they learn and in how physical structure is imposed. Within this landscape, Physics-conforming Latent Twins are positioned as latent solution-operator models: the central object is a learned latent flow map 2between time-indexed states, rather than a projected differential equation, an iden-tified vector field, or a residual-constrained solution field. Rather than treating the latent space as a passive compression of snapshots, we use the learned representation as the space in which the surrogate evolution is organized and constrained — physical structure is not an auxiliary diagnostic imposed after prediction, but part of what the learned solution operator is designed to encode and preserve. The main contributions of this work are to develop, analyze, and demonstrate a framework for Physics-conforming Latent Twins. We formulate Latent Twin as latent surrogate solution operators whose latent flow maps can be constrained directly, rather than relying only on penalties or diagnostics in the physical variables. To connect phys-ical constraints with latent dynamics, we introduce a constraint-transfer viewpoint that relates structure in the state space to compatible structure in the latent space. This yields structural approximation bounds showing that an a posteriori violation of prescribed physical constraints is controlled by the Latent Twins approximation error, with sharper estimates when the same constraint is encoded and enforced directly in latent space. We then specialize the framework to linear latent flow maps, deriv-ing algebraic conditions for preserving linear invariants, quadratic energy structures, and dissipative inequalities. Finally, we demonstrate the framework through ODE and PDE experiments that test reconstruction, latent evolution, constraint preservation, and long-time behavior, including stable linear systems, nonlinear dynamics with con-servation or energy structure, and a heat-equation benchmark illustrating dissipative behavior. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we position Physics-conforming Latent Twins relative to related surrogate modeling approaches, formalize the Latent Twin solution-operator framework, and introduce structural func-tionals for conservation, admissibility, and dissipation; these topics are developed in Sections 2.1 to 2.3, respectively. In Section 3, we derive approximation and structure-preservation results, including a posteriori control of structural defects in Section 3.1 and a priori bounds in Section 3.2 that sharpen when constraints are enforced in latent space. We also introduce physics-conforming latent flows and discuss algebraic realizations for linear invariants, quadratic invariants, and dissipative structures in Section 3.3. Numerical experiments in Section 4 demonstrate the proposed frame-work on ODE benchmarks and PDE examples, discussed in Sections 4.2 and 4.3. We conclude in Section 5 by discussing limitations and future directions. 

# 2 Background 

This section establishes the background needed to formulate Physics-conforming Latent Twins as structure-aware surrogate solution operators. We first situate the framework among related approaches in scientific machine learning, emphasizing the distinction between learning projected equations, residual-constrained solutions, vec-tor fields, and latent solution maps. We then recall the Latent Twin formulation and fix notation for the encoder, decoder, and latent flow map. Finally, we introduce structural functionals to represent conservation, admissibility, and dissipation within a common mathematical framework. These ingredients set up the central question 3addressed in the remainder of the paper: how physical structure in the state space can be represented, enforced, and controlled through constraints on the latent dynamics. 

# 2.1 Positioning among surrogate modeling approaches 

Scientific machine learning has produced a broad range of surrogate modeling approaches for time-dependent physical systems, and a comprehensive review is beyond the scope of this work. Rather than attempting an exhaustive survey, we focus on methodological directions most closely connected to the Latent Twin framework: reduced-order modeling, Koopman-based methods, neural operators, physics-informed neural networks, and latent representation learning for scientific dynamics. These approaches share the goal of replacing expensive time-dependent simulations by effi-cient surrogate models, but they differ in the mathematical object they choose to learn. Classical reduced-order modeling starts from the observation that many scien-tific systems evolve on or near low-dimensional solution manifolds. Projection-based methods such as proper orthogonal decomposition and reduced-basis methods there-fore construct a low-dimensional trial space and approximate the governing equations within that space [4, 5]. This perspective has been foundational for scientific com-puting: it shows that efficient surrogates are possible when the dominant dynamical degrees of freedom can be identified. A second line of work is based on the Koopman viewpoint. Instead of reducing the state directly, Koopman methods lift the dynamics to a space of observables in which nonlinear evolution can be represented linearly, at least formally [6, 7]. Dynamic mode decomposition and its variants provide practical finite-dimensional approximations of this idea from data [8, 9]. More recently, Koopman autoencoders use neural networks to learn coordinates in which the latent evolution is approximately linear [10, 11]. These methods have moved the field forward by connecting representation learning with interpretable linear latent dynamics, but they are typically organized around evolution in learned coordinates rather than around physics-conforming solution operators. A third related direction is sparse model discovery and system identification, most prominently the sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics (SINDy) framework [12]. These methods seek explicit governing equations by selecting a small number of active terms from a prescribed library of candidate functions, with extensions to PDEs, weak formulations, implicit dynamics, control inputs, and constrained or physics-informed variants [13–16]. Physics-conforming Latent Twins share the emphasis on interpretable and structured dynamics, but differ in the mathematical object being learned: rather than identifying an explicit vector field or differential equation, we learn a latent solution operator whose admissible evolution is constrained by structural functionals. A fourth major direction is physics-informed learning. Physics-informed neural networks incorporate known differential equations directly into the training objec-tive, typically through residual losses evaluated at collocation points [17–19]. These approaches have reshaped the way data and governing equations are combined, espe-cially in settings where observations are sparse or boundary and initial conditions are known. At the same time, the physical structure is usually imposed as a residual 4penalty in the ambient variables, rather than through a structured latent evolution operator. A related line of work embeds physical structure directly into the neural network architecture rather than as a penalty. Hamiltonian Neural Networks [20] parametrize the vector field by learning a scalar Hamiltonian and deriving dynamics through Hamil-ton’s equations, thereby guaranteeing exact energy conservation by construction. This inductive bias leads to faster training and better generalization on conservative sys-tems such as the two-body problem and the pendulum, and produces models that are perfectly time-reversible. While Hamiltonian Neural Networks operate at the level of the vector field in the original state space, Physics-conforming Latent Twins pursue a complementary goal: enforcing analogous conservative structure on the latent solution operator rather than on the learned dynamics directly. Neural operators take another step by learning mappings between function spaces. Architectures such as DeepONet and Fourier neural operators learn input-output maps associated with parametric differential equations or time-dependent solution maps [21–23]. This operator-learning viewpoint has been highly influential because it shifts attention from learning individual solutions to learning solution maps that generalize across families of inputs. Our work adopts this solution-map perspective, but asks how such maps can be represented in latent coordinates where physical structure can be imposed directly on the learned evolution. Finally, recent representation-learning approaches combine latent variables with learned dynamics, operator maps, or coordinate-based functional representations. These methods ask whether high-dimensional scientific states can be represented in compact coordinates where prediction becomes easier. Latent space dynamics identi-fication methods, such as LaSDI and its variants, use autoencoders to compress PDE solution data and then learn reduced dynamics in the latent space [24–27]. Related neural-field approaches use coordinate-based decoders or implicit neural representa-tions to represent states as continuous functions, enabling prediction across irregular grids, complex geometries, and varying resolutions [28–30]. These works have substan-tially advanced latent and functional representations for scientific dynamics. Latent Twins share this broad goal, but differ in their organizing principle: the central object is a latent solution operator, learned jointly with the encoder and decoder, and designed to support physics-conforming structure between arbitrary states and times. 

# 2.2 Latent Twins 

We now recall the solution-operator formulation of Latent Twins and introduce the notation used throughout the analysis.               

> Definition 1 (Latent Twin) Let Φ denote the solution operator of a time-evolutionary system on a normed vector space U,Φ( t, s, ·) : U → U ,
> where Φ( t, s, u s) maps a state us∈ U at time sto the corresponding state at time t. A Latent Twin of Φ is a surrogate solution operator of the form Ψ( t, s, u s) := d ms→t(e(us)) ,(1)

5where Z is a latent space, e : U → Z is an encoder, ms→t : Z → Z is a latent flow map, and 

d : Z → U is a decoder. The maps e, ms→t, and d are trained so that 

d ◦ e ≈ id U

on the relevant subset of U, and Ψ( t, s, u s) ≈ Φ( t, s, u s)for the time pairs and states of interest. 

Remark 1 (Notation, time dependence, and state spaces) In practice, the encoder, latent flow map, and decoder depend on trainable parameters θ,

eθ : U → Z, mθ,s →t : Z → Z, dθ : Z → U .

For readability, we suppress the dependence on θ whenever no ambiguity arises. The nota-tion is intentionally abstract in both time and state space. The indices s and t may denote continuous times, discrete time levels, or more general ordered parameters indexing system states. Thus, ms→t should be understood as a latent map between two indexed states, and no temporal ordering (e.g., s < t ) is imposed at the level of notation. For irreversible or strongly directional systems, however, approximating inverse-time maps may be ill-posed or unstable. The state space U is likewise kept abstract. It may be finite-dimensional, as in a fully discrete dynamical system or ordinary differential equation, or infinite-dimensional, as in a PDE posed on a function space. In the latter case, practical encoder and decoder architec-tures are typically implemented after discretization or observation; the approximation results below make this step explicit through projection and reconstruction maps. Alternatively, one may regard the encoder and decoder themselves as operators between function spaces, as in operator-learning or neural-field formulations [21, 22, 31]. Finally, although the latent space is often chosen to be lower-dimensional than the state space, dim( Z) ≪ dim( U) is not required. Larger latent spaces may be useful for auxiliary variables, structural constraints, or richer latent dynamics [32]. 

Having fixed the solution-operator notation, we now describe the structural properties that we aim to transfer from the physical dynamics to the latent flow map. 

# 2.3 Physics-conforming properties and approximation setting 

Time-evolutionary systems often preserve, restrict, or dissipate quantities of phys-ical relevance. Examples include conserved mass or energy, dissipative inequalities, admissibility conditions such as positivity or boundedness, and symmetry constraints [33–35]. These properties are not merely side conditions to be checked after predic-tion; they are organizing principles that shape the class of admissible dynamics. For instance, in the SIR model, the relation S + I + R = const . identifies an invariant manifold on which the physically meaningful dynamics evolve [33]. Conversely, the assumption of a closed population is itself a structural modeling principle: it restricts the admissible class of epidemic models to dynamics that preserve the total population, of which the classical SIR equations are one example. To make this viewpoint precise without committing to a particular governing equation, we encode such principles abstractly through a structural functional C : U → 

Rk, acting on the state space U. Along an evolution ut, the quantities C(ut) describe 6the physical structures to be preserved or controlled over time. For differentiable C,examples include conserved quantities and dissipative structures satisfying ddt C(ut) = 0 , or ddt C(ut) ≤ 0. (2) The equality case represents preserved relations, such as conservation laws or invariant manifolds. The inequality case represents admissibility or monotonicity properties, such as positivity, boundedness, entropy inequalities, or energy dissipation. Thus, as discussed above, C is not meant to determine the full dynamics; rather, it records selected structural information that any physically meaningful evolution should satisfy. For continuous-time dynamics, an invariant C(ut) = 0 also has the local form 0 = ddt C(ut) = DC(ut) D(ut), u′ = D(u). (3) Thus, structural functionals constrain the admissible evolution: the vector field must be tangent to the level sets of C. Since Latent Twins are formulated at the level of solution operators, we do not require access to D. Instead, we ask whether the surrogate solution operator preserves the structural relation encoded by C.We first treat this question a posteriori. The approximation theorem of [3] gives uniform control of the lifted Latent Twin surrogate on a compact invariant set. Conse-quently, any Lipschitz structural functional evaluated on the surrogate remains close to its value along the exact flow. We later show that sharper estimates are possible when the structure is imposed directly in latent space. 

Assumption on PDEs and Latent Twin. 

Let ( U, ∥·∥ U ) be a Banach space, and let Φ( t, s, ·) and Φ N (t, s, ·) denote the exact PDE solution operator and corresponding discrete flow on [ T0, T end ], respectively. We make the following assumptions: (A1) Well-posed flow. Assume there exists a compact invariant set K ⊂ U such that Φ( t, s, ·) : K → K 

is well defined for all s, t ∈ [T0, T end ], and is Lipschitz continuous in the initial condition on [ T0, T end ]2 × K with constant LK > 0. 

(A2) Stable and consistent spatial discretization. Let PN : U → RN and 

RN : RN → U be uniformly bounded projection and lifting operators satisfying 

εdisc := sup 

> u∈K

∥RN (PN (u)) − u∥U → 0 for N → ∞ ,

and assume the discrete flow Φ N is consistent with the exact flow in the sense that for some constant Cdisc > 0, sup 

> u∈K
> t,s ∈[T0,T end ]

∥RN (Φ N (t, s, P N (u))) − Φ( t, s, u )∥U ≤ Cdisc εdisc .

7(A3) Expressiveness of Latent Twin. On the compact discrete state set 

KN := PN (K) ⊂ RN ,

assume the encoder e : RN → Z, decoder d : Z → RN , and latent map m : [ T0, T end ]2 ×

Z → Z satisfy: 1. e and d are Lipschitz continuous, with decoder Lipschitz constant Ld;2. the reconstruction error obeys sup 

> x∈K N

∥d(e(x)) − x∥ ≤ εae ,

where εae ≥ 0 denotes the autoencoder reconstruction error; 3. m approximates the exact discrete latent flow 

m∗

> s→t

(z) := e ΦN (t, s, d (z)) 

uniformly, with sup 

> (t,s,z )∈[T0,T end ]2×Z

∥ms→t(z) − m∗

> s→t

(z)∥ ≤ εmap ,

where εmap ≥ 0 is the latent map approximation error. 

Theorem 1 (Latent Twin Approximation Bound [3, Theorem 2]) For us ∈ K , define the lifted Latent Twin surrogate by 

ΨN (t, s, u s) := RN



d ms→t(e(PN (us))) 

.

Then, under (A1)–(A3) , there exists a constant Clt > 0 such that 

sup 

> (s,t,u s)∈[T0,T end ]2×K

∥ΨN (t, s, u s) − Φ( t, s, u s)∥U ≤ Clt 



εdisc +  1 + e LK(Tend −T0)εae + Ldεmap 



.

In particular, if 

εdisc → 0, εae → 0, εmap → 0, for N → ∞ 

then 

ΨN → Φ uniformly on [T0, T end ]2 × K .

The proof is provided in [3], using the ODE Latent Twin approximation theorem as an intermediate step on the discretized system. In the finite-dimensional setting, ΨN reduces to the latent twin Ψ defined in Equation (1). 

# 3 Physics-conforming Latent Twins 

Physics-conforming Latent Twins build on the solution-operator formulation by incor-porating structural constraints into the latent evolution itself. We first show that fully 8data-driven Latent Twins inherit physical structure a posteriori: structural defects are controlled by the surrogate approximation error; see Section 3.1. We then intro-duce and prove in Section 3.2 that enforcing compatible constraints directly in latent space yields sharper estimates. Finally, Section 3.3 develops tractable latent-flow constructions that realize preservation or dissipation properties by design. 

# 3.1 A posteriori physics-conforming estimate 

The approximation theorem above immediately yields a corresponding control of struc-tural defect. If the surrogate trajectory is uniformly close to the true trajectory, then any Lipschitz structural functional evaluated on the surrogate must also remain close to its exact value. This gives a direct and very general a posteriori estimate. 

Theorem 2 (Constraint-consistent Latent Twin Approximation Bound) Under the assump-tions of Theorem 1, let C : U → Rk be Lipschitz continuous on a set containing the exact and surrogate trajectories, with Lipschitz constant LC > 0. Assume that the exact flow satisfies the structural property 

C Φ( t, s, u s) ≤ 0 for all (t, s, u s) ∈ [T0, T end ]2 × K ,

where the inequality is understood componentwise. Let [y]+ := max( y, 0) denote the componentwise positive part. Then the lifted Latent Twin surrogate satisfies 

sup 

> (t,s,u s)∈[T0,T end ]2×K

C ΨN (t, s, u s)  

> +

≤ LC Clt 



εdisc +  1 + e LK(Tend −T0)εae + Ldεmap 



.

Proof Fix ( t, s, u s) ∈ [T0, T end ]2 × K . Since the exact flow satisfies 

C Φ( t, s, u s) ≤ 0componentwise, it follows that 

C ΨN (t, s, u s)  

> +

≤ C ΨN (t, s, u s) − C  Φ( t, s, u s) 

> +

componentwise. Since [ a]+ ≤ | a| componentwise, 

C ΨN (t, s, u s)  

> +

≤ C ΨN (t, s, u s) − C  Φ( t, s, u s) .

By Lipschitz continuity of C,

C ΨN (t, s, u s) − C  Φ( t, s, u s) ≤ LC ∥ΨN (t, s, u s) − Φ( t, s, u s)∥U .

Taking the supremum proves the estimate by using Theorem 1. □

Corollary 1 (Equality-type structural properties) If instead the exact flow satisfies 

C Φ( t, s, u s) = 0 for all ( t, s, u s) ∈ [T0, T end ]2 × K ,

then sup 

> (t,s,u s)∈[T0,T end ]2×K

C ΨN (t, s, u s) ≤ 2LC Clt 



εdisc +  1 + e LK(Tend −T0)εae + Ldεmap 



.

Proof Apply Theorem 2 to both C and −C . The claim follows from the elementary estimate 

∥C (x)∥ ≤ [C(x)] + + [−C (x)] + .

□

9Limitations of the a posteriori estimate. 

The estimates above show that structural defect can be controlled directly from the Latent Twin approximation error. However, this control remains purely a posteriori :it is obtained by passing the full trajectory error through the Lipschitz continuity of C, so it inherits the entire approximation structure of the surrogate itself, includ-ing discretization, autoencoder, and latent-map errors, as well as the growth factor eLK(Tend −T0). Consequently, even exact structure preservation by the latent map would not yet appear in the bound. This motivates a sharper, a priori approach in which structural properties are enforced directly in latent space. 

# 3.2 A priori physics-conforming estimate 

Latent-space structural enforcement. 

The preceding estimate treats structure only after the surrogate trajectory has been produced. A sharper approach is to represent physical constraints directly in latent coordinates and enforce it at the level of the latent propagator itself. To this end, we introduce a latent constraint functional 

CZ : Z → Rk,

intended to encode the same structural property in latent space that C encodes in the original state space. If such a latent constraint is preserved exactly by the latent evolution, then structural defect need no longer be routed through the full trajec-tory approximation error. Instead, it can be controlled directly through the mismatch between C and CZ and the error introduced by encoding and decoding. Throughout, we denote by 

Z := ms→t(e(PN (us))) : us ∈ K , s ≤ t ∈ [T0, T end ] ⊂ Z

the set of latent states reachable by the latent map from encoded conditions at times 

s in K.                                     

> Definition 2 (Compatible latent constraint) Let C:U → Rkbe a constraint functional,
> d:Z→RNa discrete decoder, and RN:RN→ U the lifting operator. A latent constraint
> CZ:Z→Rkis εC-compatible with Cvia RN◦dwith defect
> εC:= sup
> z∈Z
> ∥C (RN(d(z))) − C Z(z)∥,
> provided εC<∞.

The defect εC quantifies how faithfully the latent constraint CZ represents the physical constraint after decoding and lifting. In this sense, compatibility is the mathematical bridge between structural properties in state space and their latent counterparts. When C is known explicitly, the choice CZ = C ◦ RN ◦ d yields εC = 0 by definition. In practice, however, this pullback is typically unavailable before training, since the decoder is learned, and moreover may be too complicated to preserve directly 10 through explicit constraints on the latent propagator. One therefore prescribes CZ

from a tractable family and uses εC to measure the resulting mismatch, see following discussions in Section 3.3. 

Definition 3 (Structure-preserving latent flow) Let CZ : Z → Rk be a latent constraint. The latent flow m is CZ -preserving if for all z ∈ Z and s ≤ t ∈ [T0, T end ]: 

(i) (inequality constraint) if CZ (z) ≤ 0, then 

CZ

 ms→t(z) ≤ C Z (z); (ii) (equality constraint) if CZ (z) = 0, then 

CZ

 ms→t(z) = CZ (z),

expressing exact invariance of CZ along latent trajectories. Condition (ii) is the natural invariance requirement for a conservation law: the latent constraint is preserved exactly, mirroring C(u(t)) = 0 in physical space. Con-dition (i) is stronger than mere forward-invariance of the admissible set {C Z ≤ 0}: it requires CZ to be monotonically non-increasing along latent trajectories, analogous to a Lyapunov or entropy condition. This monotonicity is needed in the proof of Theorem 3.5 to control [ CZ (zs→t)] + even when the encoded initial state zs is not exactly in the admissible set, which can happen when compatibility or autoencoder errors are nonzero. For dissipative systems such as the heat equation, this condition is physically natural: CZ plays the role of a latent energy that the dynamics dissipate. 

Theorem 3 (Structure-preserving Latent Twin Bound) Let C : U → Rk be Lipschitz with constant LC > 0, and suppose the true flow satisfies C(Φ( t, s, u s)) ≤ 0 for all (t, s, u s) ∈

[T0, T end ]2 × K . Let CZ be compatible with C via RN ◦ d with defect εC in the sense of Definition 2, and suppose the latent map m is CZ -preserving in the sense of Definition 3. Then 

sup 

> (t,s,u s)∈[T0,T end ]2×K

h

C



ΨN (t, s, u s)

i  

> +

≤ 2εC + LC εae .

Proof Let zs := e(PN (us)) denote the encoded state at time s and zs→t := m(t, s, z s) the surrogate latent state propagated to time t, so that Ψ N (t, s, u s) = RN (d(zs→t)). Insert 

CZ (zs→t) to decompose the physical constraint violation: 

C(RN (d(zs→t)))  

> +

≤ C(RN (d(zs→t))) − C Z (zs→t) 

> +

+ CZ (zs→t)

> +

.

The first term is bounded by εC by Definition 2. For the second, since m is CZ -preserving and s ≤ t,

CZ (zs→t) ≤ C Z (zs).

It remains to bound the initial latent constraint value. Writing ˆ u := RN (d(zs)) ∈ U , which satisfies ∥ˆu − us∥U ≤ εae , and inserting C(us) ≤ 0, 

CZ (zs) ≤ CZ (zs) − C (RN (d(zs))) + C(ˆ u) − C (us) + C(us).

11 The first term is bounded by εC by Definition 2, the second by LC ∥ˆu − us∥U ≤ LC εae , and 

C(us) ≤ 0. Taking the positive part, combining, and taking the supremum over ( t, s, u s) ∈

[T0, T end ]2 × K yields the stated bound. □

Remark 2 Theorem 3 is sharper than the a posteriori estimate of Theorem 2 since it avoids routing structural defect through the full trajectory approximation error. The a posteriori estimate first bounds the surrogate trajectory error and then passes this error through the Lipschitz continuity of C. As a result, it inherits the complete approximation structure of the surrogate, including discretization error, latent-flow error, and the growth factor e LK(Tend −T0)

from the underlying solution-operator approximation theorem. By contrast, when a compatible latent constraint is enforced directly by the latent flow, the latent evolution itself contributes no additional structural violation. The remaining defect is controlled only by the compatibility error between the physical constraint C and its latent counterpart CZ , together with the decoder/autoencoder error. In particular, when εC = 0, the bound reduces to sup 

> (t,s,u s)∈[T0,T end ]2×K

h

C



ΨN (t, s, u s)

i  

> +

≤ LC εae .

Thus, in the ideal compatible case, only the autoencoding error remains. No additional amplification through the latent evolution appears in the structural bound. This provides a theoretical justification for prescribing and enforcing suitable constraints directly in latent space, rather than relying only on a posteriori control through trajectory approximation. 

# 3.3 Physics-conforming latent flow 

The bound of Theorem 3 shows that physics conformity is not a post-processing prop-erty of an accurate trajectory surrogate, but a design principle for the latent twin itself. The design of CZ is therefore inseparable from the design of ms→t: CZ should approx-imate the decoder-induced pullback of the physical quantity C, while ms→t should belong to a class that preserves or dissipates CZ by construction or with controlled violation. Thus the admissible latent constraints are determined simultaneously by the geometry of the reconstruction map and by the algebraic or geometric structure of the latent flow. 

Latent constraints. 

The ideal latent constraint is the decoder-induced pullback 

C⋆Z := C ◦ RN ◦ d. 

With this choice, the latent constraint agrees exactly with the physical constraint after decoding, so that εC = 0 and the compatibility term in the structure-preserving bound vanishes; see Remark 2. In practice, however, this pullback is not known a priori , since the decoder is learned together with the latent representation. One therefore chooses a tractable latent constraint CZ that approximates C⋆Z on the latent data manifold while belonging to a class that can be preserved or dissipated by the latent flow. 12 time evolution direction    

> physical state space U
> latent space Z
> predicted state space ˜U

# u(s) Φs→t u(t) 

> C(u)physical constraint

# zs ms→t zt  

> CZ(z)latent realization
> compatible surrogate

e e

˜u(s) ˜u(t)

d dFig. 1 : Schematic of a Physics-conforming Latent Twin. The encoder e maps a state 

u(s) ∈ U to a latent state zs ∈ Z , the latent flow ms→t propagates zs to zt, and the decoder d maps the latent states back to reconstructed or predicted states. The structural functional C encodes a physical property in the state space, for example a conserved quantity or a dissipative functional. A compatible latent constraint CZ

realizes this structure in latent space, where it can be preserved or dissipated directly by the latent flow. In this way, physics conformity is imposed on the latent evolution itself. This approximation requirement must be balanced with the structure of the latent flow. A conservative latent constraint should satisfy 

CZ (ms→t(z)) = CZ (z),

while a dissipative one should satisfy 

CZ (ms→t(z)) ≤ C Z (z), s ≤ t. 

Thus CZ should both represent the physical quantity after decoding and belong to a class that the chosen latent flow can preserve or dissipate, see Figure 1. A natural starting point is the simplest setting in which the reconstruction map and the latent flow both have explicit linear structure. The following result identifies this clean exact case: for a linear reconstruction map and a linear latent flow, linear 13 and quadratic physical structures pull back to linear and quadratic latent constraints, and their preservation reduces to finite-dimensional conditions on the latent flow. 

Proposition 4 (Exact realization of linear and quadratic constraints) Let Z be a finite-dimensional latent space and let U be the physical state space. Suppose that the reconstruction map is linear, RN (d(z)) = Dz, where D : Z → U is a bounded linear lifting operator, and let the latent flow be linear, ms→t(z) = As,t z.

1. If C : U → R is a continuous linear functional, then there exists a vector a such that the decoder-induced pullback is linear, C⋆Z (z) = a⊤z. It is preserved by the latent flow for all z ∈ Z if and only if A⊤

> s,t

a = a.2. If C(u) = BU (u, u ) with BU : U × U → R a continuous symmetric bilinear form, then there exists a symmetric matrix QZ such that the decoder-induced pullback satisfies C⋆Z (z) = z⊤QZ z. It is preserved by the latent flow for all z ∈ Z if and only if A⊤

> s,t

QZ As,t = QZ , and it is dissipated for s ≤ t if and only if A⊤

> s,t

QZ As,t ⪯ QZ .

Proof We prove the two cases separately. 

1. Since C is linear and D is linear, the decoder-induced pullback C⋆Z (z) = C(Dz) is a linear functional on the finite-dimensional space Z. Hence there exists a vector 

a such that C⋆Z (z) = a⊤z. Preservation under ms→t(z) = As,t z is equivalent to 

a⊤As,t z = a⊤z for all z ∈ Z, which holds if and only if A⊤

> s,t

a = a.2. Since BU is symmetric bilinear and D is linear, the decoder-induced pullback 

C⋆Z (z) = BU (Dz, Dz) is a quadratic form on the finite-dimensional space Z. There-fore, after choosing coordinates on Z, there exists a symmetric matrix QZ such that C⋆Z (z) = z⊤QZ z. Preservation is equivalent to z⊤A⊤

> s,t

QZ As,t z = z⊤QZ z for all z ∈ Z, which holds if and only if A⊤

> s,t

QZ As,t = QZ . The dissipative condition follows similarly from z⊤(A⊤

> s,t

QZ As,t − QZ )z ≤ 0 for all z ∈ Z.

□

Remark 3 (Scope of the exact realization result) The preceding proposition is stated in a simplified setting to isolate the basic correspondence between physical structure, latent constraints, and latent-flow invariance. 

1. The proposition is stated for a single scalar constraint C : U → R to keep the notation light. In practice, many systems possess several simultaneous structural principles, such as mass and energy conservation in fluid dynamics, mass and positivity constraints in population dynamics, or conservation laws together with entropy inequalities in kinetic equations. The framework extends directly to vector-valued constraints C : U → Rk and CZ : Z → Rk. The corresponding compatibility defects, operator constraints, and trajectory-level penalties may then be imposed componentwise or through suitable weighted combinations. 14 2. Affine decoder offsets and affine or quadratic-affine constraint terms are omitted for notational clarity. They can be incorporated without changing the underly-ing principle by recentering or by augmenting the latent state with a constant coordinate. 3. The conditions have a direct invariance interpretation: A⊤

> s,t

a = a means that a⊤z

is invariant under the latent flow, while A⊤

> s,t

QZ As,t = QZ means that z⊤QZ z is invariant. For example, a = [1 , . . . , 1] ⊤ corresponds to preservation of the sum of latent coordinates, analogous to total mass, whereas QZ = I corresponds to preservation of the Euclidean latent norm, analogous to a latent energy. 4. The linear case is stated only for conservation. On a full vector space, a global one-sided inequality for a scalar linear functional reduces to equality; nontrivial monotonicity requires restricting the dynamics to an admissible ordered set, such as a cone or positivity-preserving state space. For nonlinear neural-network decoders, the exact result should be read as a local design principle. Near the latent data manifold, nonlinear reconstruction maps may be approximated by affine maps, and piecewise affine networks, such as ReLU networks, have this structure exactly on each activation region. Thus linear and quadratic phys-ical functionals motivate affine and quadratic latent constraints even when the global decoder is nonlinear. 

Latent flow parameterizations. 

The preceding discussion identifies which latent constraints are natural from the recon-struction side. We now briefly describe how different choices of the latent flow support their enforcement. A general neural parameterization of the latent flow ms→t is the most expressive choice. In this case, conservation or dissipation is usually imposed at the trajectory-level, for example by penalizing deviations of CZ (ms→t(zs)) from CZ (zs), or by using a one-sided penalty for dissipative constraints. This allows flexible dynamics, but exact preservation is generally not guaranteed away from the sampled training pairs. A useful reference case for operator-level enforcement is the exponential latent flow 

ms→t(z) = exp(( t − s)W )z. 

This form preserves the semigroup structure, mr→t ◦ ms→r = ms→t for s ≤ r ≤ t,and turns structure preservation into generator-level conditions. For example, conser-vation of a linear latent quantity a⊤z corresponds to a⊤W = 0, while conservation or dissipation of a quadratic latent quantity z⊤QZ z corresponds to conditions on 

W ⊤QZ + QZ W . These operator-level conditions are summarized in Table 1. The same time-consistency idea can be combined with nonlinear coordinates by conjugation. Let V : Z → Z be an invertible neural network and let φs→t be a simpler latent flow satisfying φr→t ◦ φs→r = φs→t. Then 

ms→t = V ◦ φs→t ◦ V −1

15 inherits the same composition property. Constraints may be imposed in the trans-formed coordinate and pulled back through V −1, allowing nonlinear latent dynamics while retaining an analytically controlled inner flow. In particular, a quadratic invari-ant in the transformed coordinate generally becomes a nonlinear invariant in the original latent coordinate. The constraint may be enforced at different levels. At the architectural level, the latent flow is parameterized so that the desired property holds identically, for example by choosing a skew-symmetric or dissipative generator. At the operator-regularization level, one penalizes algebraic violations such as a⊤W or W ⊤QZ + QZ W . At the trajectory level, one penalizes violations evaluated on sampled latent pairs, such as 

CZ (ms→t(zs)) − C Z (zs). These choices trade expressiveness against exactness: archi-tectural constraints give the strongest guarantees, while trajectory-level penalties are more flexible but only enforce the property on sampled data. Table 1 summarizes the preceding design choices by listing representative physi-cal functionals, compatible latent constraint classes, and corresponding operator- or trajectory-level realizations. 

# 4 Numerics 

The numerical experiments are designed to assess how Physics-conforming Latent Twins encode and preserve structure across representative ODE and PDE benchmarks. The goal is not to provide an exhaustive comparison, but to demonstrate how different physical structures can be incorporated into latent solution operators and how such constraints affect prediction accuracy, stability, extrapolation, and qualitative physical consistency. We first introduce the shared training setup, notation, and loss formulation in Section 4.1. The ODE experiments in Section 4.2 proceed from linear to nonlinear and dissipative dynamics. In the linear setting, we compare Latent Twins with POD and DMD on stable oscillatory systems. For nonlinear dynamics, we study the multi-group SIR model and the undamped pendulum, which illustrate soft enforcement of a linear conservation law and hard enforcement of a quadratic latent invariant, respec-tively. The pendulum example also includes a comparison with a physics-informed neural network baseline. We then consider gradient-flow dynamics from optimization as a dissipative benchmark. Finally, Section 4.3 turns to canonical heat and wave equations, which test the framework on high-dimensional spatially discretized PDEs with dissipative and conservative structure. 

# 4.1 Computational experiment setup 

Throughout the experiments, we follow the Latent Twin training setup and learn the latent representation and the time-evolution surrogate jointly. Given trajectories of a dynamical system, we form training pairs 

n

(xjs, s j ), (xjt , t j )

oJj=1 

, where xjs and xjt

are states from the same trajectory evaluated at two time points sj , t j ∈ [T0, T end ]. In the PDE examples, these states correspond to finite-dimensional projections of the underlying solution, e.g., xjs = RN (u(sj )) and xjt = RN (u(tj )). The time pairs are 16 Table 1 : Representative physical structures and compatible latent-space realizations. Each column displays one constraint type in isolation, although practical models may combine several structures. The examples are written in PDE notation, where physical quantities are naturally expressed as spatial functionals over a domain Ω, but the same linear, quadratic, and monotone structures also arise for ODEs, iterative optimization dynamics, and other evolutionary or sequential systems. “Lyapunov-type” refers to a functional whose value is nonincreasing along admissible trajectories. Operator-level realizations are shown for the exponential linear latent flow ms→t(z) = exp(( t−s)W )z;other latent-flow classes may admit analogous structure-preserving parameterizations. In the enstrophy example, ω = ∇ × u denotes the vorticity of the velocity field.                                                       

> Linear Quadratic Monotone Example physical functional C(u) =
> Z
> Ω
> u(ξ) d ξ
> C(u) =
> Z
> Ω
> |u(ξ)|2dξ
> C(u) =
> Z
> Ω
> |ω(ξ)|2dξ
> C(u) =
> Z
> Ω
> u(ξ) log u(ξ) d ξ
> Desired property C(u(t)) = C(u(s)) C(u(t)) = C(u(s)) C(u(t)) ≤ C (u(s)) for s≤t
> Compatible latent constraint CZ(z) = a⊤z+bCZ(z) = z⊤QZz+a⊤z+b
> CZ:Z→R
> Lyapunov-type latent functional
> Operator-level realization a⊤W= 0 W⊤QZ+QZW= 0 W+W⊤⪯0
> Trajectory-level realization
> CZ(ms→t(zs)) =CZ(zs)
> CZ(ms→t(zs)) =CZ(zs)
> CZ(ms→t(zs)) ≤ C Z(zs)for s≤t

sampled uniformly from the interval of interest, though other sampling strategies may also be used. For all ODE examples considered in this section, trajectories are generated using 

scipy.integrate.odeint with nt = 20000 uniformly spaced time steps and toler-ances atol = 10 −12 and rtol = 10 −10 . From the resulting trajectories, we construct 

J = 2 15 state pairs, of which 0 .8J are used for training and 0 .2J for testing. Unless stated otherwise, all models are trained with batch size 256. For the PDE examples, 17 trajectories are generated using the spectral solver Dedalus [36] on a periodic domain with randomized smooth initial conditions; details are given in Section 4.3. The training objective combines an autoencoder reconstruction loss, a prediction loss, and, depending on the numerical setup, an additional conformity loss that encodes the desired physical structure. We write the total empirical loss as 

Ltotal (θ) = λauto Lauto (θ) + λpred Lpred (θ) + λconf Lconf (θ), (4) where the first two terms are, in our numerical experiments, chosen as squared ℓ2

losses, 

Lauto (θ) = 12JJX

> j=1

dθ(eθ(xjs)) − xjs 

> 22

+ 12JJX

> j=1

dθ(eθ(xjt )) − xjt

> 22

,

and 

Lpred (θ) = 1

> JJ

X

> j=1

dθ

 mθ,s j →tj (eθ (xjs))  − xjt

> 22

.

Recall, θ denotes the trainable parameters of the encoder, decoder, and latent flow. Since Lpred measures an error along the learned trajectory map, other norms may also be natural. In particular, an ℓ1 loss can provide a more directly interpretable accumulated trajectory discrepancy. For simplicity and consistency across the exper-iments, however, we use squared ℓ2 losses in the numerical investigations below. The conformity term Lconf depends on the physical structure of the underlying system, as discussed in Section 3.3, and on whether the constraint is imposed implicitly. We set the weights λauto = λpred = 1, and λconf is chosen separately for each experi-ment. When the desired structure can be enforced exactly, the conformity term may be replaced by a hard architectural constraint on the latent map ms→t and λconf = 0. This general setup is intentionally kept simple. Additional terms, such as semigroup-consistency losses, regularization of the encoder and decoder, or state-space penalties on decoded physical quantities, can be incorporated naturally. In the present numer-ical section, however, we focus on the minimal modifications needed to demonstrate the effect of physics-conforming latent dynamics. Remaining experiment-specific archi-tectures, data generation procedures, constraint choices, and evaluation metrics are described in the corresponding subsections. To support reproducibility, demonstration code is publicly available on GitHub (available upon acceptance). 

# 4.2 ODE benchmarks 

We consider four ODE benchmarks that progress from linear conservative dynam-ics to nonlinear, Hamiltonian, and dissipative systems, thereby illustrating different strategies for imposing latent constraints. In Section 4.2.1, we study a linear har-monic oscillator and compare the resulting Latent Twin with POD and DMD baselines. In Section 4.2.2, we turn to a nonlinear multigroup SIR model, where total-population conservation is encoded through a softly enforced linear latent constraint. 18 In Section 4.2.3, we consider the undamped pendulum, using a hard Hamiltonian archi-tectural constraint to enforce a quadratic latent invariant, together with an additional comparison against a PINN baseline. Finally, Section 4.2.4 studies the Rosenbrock gradient flow as a dissipative benchmark, in which monotone energy decay provides the relevant physics-conforming structure. 

4.2.1 Harmonic oscillator 

We train our Physics-conforming Latent Twins on stable linear ODE systems of the form 

x′ = M x (5) where M has purely imaginary eigenvalues, so the system exhibits energy-preserving oscillations. We consider a high-dimensional system with nx = 100, where the dynamics admit a low-rank representation M = U ⊤AU , with U ∈ R10 ×100 having orthonormal rows and A ∈ R10 ×10 skew-symmetric. The initial condition is drawn randomly as x0 ∼ U ([0 , 1] nx ) and trajectories are integrated over t ∈ [0 , 10]. In parallel to the Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) convention, we choose a linear projection encoder P ∈ R10 ×100 with orthonormal rows and decoder P ⊤,yielding the projected latent twin model Ψ( t, s, x s) = P ⊤ exp(( t − s)W )P x s. (6) To promote the energy-preserving structure, we enforce skew-symmetry of the learned latent operator W through a soft-constraining regularization term 

Lconf = ∥W + W ⊤∥2F, λconf = 10 −3. (7) The Physics-conforming Latent Twins is trained for 200 epochs using Adam with fixed learning rate 10 −3.We compare the Physics-conforming Latent Twins against two classical reduced-order modeling methods. POD projects the dynamics onto the leading r = 10 empirical modes extracted from the training trajectories and integrates the projected system forward in time. In this particular setting, the POD solution serves as an optimal achievable projection benchmark for models of the form Equation (6). Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD) identifies a best-fit linear operator directly from snapshot pairs in the original state space and uses it for prediction. Both baselines use the same training data as the Physics-conforming Latent Twins (trajectory before training pair selection). The results are presented in Figure 2. POD provides a favorable benchmark because it directly projects onto the dominant invariant subspace of the dynamics and there-fore achieves near machine-precision error ( ≈ 10 −7). While the error of DMD grows to approximately 10 −2 over the prediction horizon, the Physics-conforming Latent Twins maintains stable errors around 10 −3. This stability indicates that the learned latent flow captures the long-time oscillatory structure of the system from paired state observations, without requiring explicit access to the governing matrix. 19 Fig. 2 : Comparison of the Physics-conforming Latent Twin, POD, and DMD on the stable linear ODE x′ = M x with ambient dimension nx = 100 and intrinsic dimension 

r = 10. POD provides an optimal projection benchmark in this constructed low-rank linear setting. 

4.2.2 SIR 

We consider a multigroup SIR (Susceptible-Infected-Recovered) system with n = 20 coupled groups, giving a state dimension of 60 [37]. Each group evolves according to 

S′ 

> i

= −βiSiλi, I′ 

> i

= βiSiλi − γiIi, R′ 

> i

= γiIi,

where λi = P 

> j

Mij Ij is the force of infection by the mixing matrix M ∈ Rn×n.The mixing matrix is constructed with rank r = 3, introduction low-rank coupling between groups. Transmission and recovery rates are drawn independently as βi ∼U(0 .15 , 0.45) and γi ∼ U (0 .05 , 0.25). Initial conditions are sampled from Si(0) ∼U(0 .7, 0.99), Ii(0) ∼ U (0 .005 , 0.02), and Ri(0) = 1 − Si(0) − Ii(0). Trajectories are integrated over t ∈ [0 , 60]. The SIR dynamics evolve on a nonlinear manifold, so a linear autoencoder as utilized in Section 4.2.1, is insufficient for accurate long-horizon prediction as shown in Figure 3a. We therefore adopt a nonlinear autoencoder. The encoder and decoder are fully connected multilayer perceptrons with tanh activations. The encoder uses the width schedule 60 → 16 → 8 → nz and the decoder mirrors this architecture. We set nz = 3. The latent dynamics are modeled by the linear exponential flow zt =exp(( t − s)W )zs. Thus, the nonlinear autoencoder provides the expressive embedding, while the latent evolution remains linear and structure-constrained. The SIR system preserves total population, i.e., P 

> i

S′ 

> i

+ I′ 

> i

+ R′ 

> i

= 0, which in the state space corresponds to a linear constraint. Following Table 1, we encode this linear conservation structure through a soft regularization term that penalizes violations of the corresponding latent invariant: 

Lconf = ∥W ⊤1∥22, λconf = 10 −2.

20 (a) Linear autoencoder (b) Nonlinear autoencoder 

Fig. 3 : 95% prediction-error bands for the SIR experiments. (a) Linear autoencoder: 

xt = P ⊤ exp(( t−s)W )P x s. (b) Nonlinear autoencoder: xt = ( d◦exp(( t−s)W )◦e)( xs). Notice that the error magnitudes of nonlinear model is approximately two orders of magnitude smaller than the linear one. As shown in Figure 3b, the nonlinear autoencoder provides a representation in which the SIR dynamics are well captured by a linear exponential latent flow over the training horizon. The contrast with the linear autoencoder indicates that the main limitation is not the use of a linear latent flow, but the expressiveness of the embedding used to represent the nonlinear SIR solution manifold. We also compare against POD and DMD using the same reduced dimension nz = 3. POD is computed from the leading empirical modes and uses the projected right-hand side, making it equation-aware [38]. DMD instead identifies a best-fit linear evolution operator from snapshot data. In contrast, the Latent Twin learns both the nonlinear representation and the latent evolution directly from paired state observations. The comparison results are shown in Figure 4. POD is equation-aware, since it uses the projected right-hand side, while DMD is fit directly from the full snapshot trajectory. The Latent Twin nevertheless outperforms both baselines. This improve-ment reflects the advantage of learning the representation and latent evolution jointly: the nonlinear encoder–decoder captures the curved SIR solution manifold, while the physics-conforming latent operator exploits the low-rank coupling structure without requiring explicit knowledge of the governing equations. 

4.2.3 Undamped pendulum 

We next consider the undamped pendulum 

θ′ = ω, ω′ = − gl sin θ, 

with l = 1, g = 9 .8, initial state ( θ, ω ) = ( π/ 4, 0), and training horizon t ∈ [0 , 10]. The pendulum is a conservative Hamiltonian system with nonlinear physical energy 

H(θ, ω ) = 12 ω2 + gl

 1 − cos θ.

21 Fig. 4 : Relative prediction errors for the Physics-conforming Latent Twin, POD, and DMD on the multigroup SIR system with nx = 60 and reduced dimension nz = 3. The Latent Twin achieves lower error by combining a nonlinear state representation with a structure-regularized latent evolution. This makes the example qualitatively different from the SIR experiment: the conserved quantity is not a linear functional of the state, so representing it through a simple linear constraint on the latent generator would require the encoder and decoder to absorb the nonlinear geometry of the Hamiltonian. Instead, we impose a quadratic latent invariant as a tractable compatible surrogate for the decoder-induced pullback of the physical Hamiltonian. Specifically, we use a linear exponential latent flow zt = exp(( t−s)W )zs and enforce preservation of the latent quadratic energy EZ (z) = 12 z⊤QZ z, with QZ = Q⊤ 

> Z

≻ 0. A sufficient condition for exact preservation of EZ is W ⊤QZ + QZ W = 0. We impose this condition as a hard architectural constraint by parameterizing 

W = JQ Z , J⊤ = −J, QZ = B⊤B + εI, 

where B is trainable and ε = 10 −4. Then, along any latent trajectory, ddt EZ (z(t)) = z(t)⊤QZ W z (t) = z(t)⊤QZ JQ Z z(t) = 0 ,

because QZ JQ Z is skew-symmetric. Thus the latent quadratic energy is conserved exactly by construction and no additional conformity penalty is needed, i.e., λconf = 0. We compare three models. The first is an unconstrained Latent Twins with the same encoder–decoder architecture and exponential latent flow, but with an uncon-strained latent generator W . The second is the Physics-conforming Latent Twins described above. Both Latent Twins models use a nonlinear encoder-decoder with latent dimension nz = 6 and are trained on 2 15 randomly sampled state pairs 

{(xs, s ), (xt, t )} from the interval [0 , 10]. The loss combines reconstruction and bidirec-tional prediction terms, and the models are trained for 100 epochs. Each Latent Twins 22 model has only 508 trainable parameters. Importantly, the Latent Twins models are not given the pendulum differential equation; they only see paired trajectory data. As a reference physics-informed baseline, we also train a physics-informed neural network (PINN) in the sense of [17]. The PINN represents the full trajectory directly as a map ΨPINN : t 7 →  θη (t), ω η (t)

using a fully connected network with four hidden layers, 64 neurons per layer, and tanh activations. Its loss penalizes the residuals 

r1(t) = ∂tθη (t) − ωη (t), r2(t) = ∂tωη (t) + gl sin( θη (t)) ,

at 500 collocation points in [0 , 10], together with a supervised data term on 20 early-time samples from [0 , 2]. We use Adam with learning rate 10 −3 for 100 ,000 iterations and weight the data term by 100. Time is normalized to [0 , 1] during training. Since the PINN uses sparse supervised trajectory data but has access to the governing equation, whereas the Latent Twins uses paired state data without equation residuals, the comparison should be understood as a qualitative comparison of extrapolation behav-ior rather than a strict data-efficiency benchmark. The PINN has 12 ,738 trainable parameters, compared with 508 parameters for each Latent Twins model. Figure 5 shows the resulting predictions on the extended interval [0 , 15]. The uncon-strained Latent Twins fits the training interval reasonably well but accumulates phase and amplitude error after t = 10, reflecting the fact that an unconstrained latent generator has no mechanism to enforce conservative long-time behavior. The PINN satisfies the differential equation residual on the training interval, but its trajectory representation is tied to the time domain on which it is trained and deteriorates under extrapolation. In contrast, the Physics-conforming Latent Twins remains stable and accurate beyond the training horizon. The improvement is not due to additional resid-ual information, but to the hard latent Hamiltonian structure: the learned flow is restricted to an energy-preserving class, which suppresses artificial growth or decay in the latent dynamics and thereby improves long-time behavior after decoding. This experiment highlights a central advantage of the Physics-conforming Latent Twins formulation. Rather than enforcing the known differential equation pointwise, as in a PINN, the method learns a solution operator in a latent space whose admissible dynamics already respect the relevant qualitative structure. For conservative systems, this distinction is especially important: preserving the geometric form of the dynamics can be more effective for extrapolation than merely reducing a residual loss over the observed training window. The SIR and pendulum experiments highlight two complementary strategies for incorporating physical structure into Latent Twins. The SIR model uses soft regular-ization of the latent operator to promote a linear conservation law, while the pendulum uses a hard parameterization of the latent generator to preserve a quadratic latent invariant. Together, these examples show how different structural principles can be incorporated within the same latent solution-operator framework. 23 Unconstrained Latent Twins 

> PINN
> Physics-conforming Latent Twins

Fig. 5 : Undamped pendulum predictions on an extended time interval. All models are trained using information from t ∈ [0 , 10] and evaluated on t ∈ [0 , 15]. The left col-umn shows the predicted state trajectory and the right column shows the prediction error. The unconstrained Latent Twins loses accuracy under extrapolation because the learned latent generator is not structurally restricted. The PINN uses the govern-ing ODE residual during training, but still deteriorates outside the training interval. The Physics-conforming Latent Twins preserves a quadratic latent invariant by con-struction and maintains stable, accurate extrapolation. 

4.2.4 Gradient flow 

As a dissipative benchmark, we consider gradient-flow dynamics associated with the optimization problem min x∈R2 f (x), where f (x1, x 2) = (1 − x1)2 + 100( x2 − x21)2. The corresponding dynamics are 

x′(t) = −∇ f (x(t)) ,

so that the objective is nonincreasing along exact trajectories: ddt f (x(t)) =

−∥∇ f (x(t)) ∥2 ≤ 0. Thus, the Rosenbrock flow provides a simple nonlinear test case in which the learned surrogate should approximate the solution operator while respecting a Lyapunov-type dissipative structure. Training trajectories are generated from uniformly sampled initial conditions 

x(0) ∈ [−1.5, 1.5] 2 over the time interval [0 , 10]. We use 4096 simulated trajectories, store 300 time points per trajectory, and sample 16 ordered pairs s ≤ t from each tra-jectory, giving 65 ,536 source–target pairs ( s, x (s)) , (t, x (t)). To better resolve the fast initial transient, we use the reparametrized time grid τ = ( t/t max )1/4 tmax , and sam-ple training pairs with a mild bias toward early times. The data are split into 95% training and 5% testing samples and normalized componentwise by min–max scaling. The Latent Twins use a fully connected autoencoder with encoder widths 2 →

32 → 32 → 32 → 16, SiLU activations, and a mirrored decoder. We compare an unconstrained Latent Twin with exponential latent flow against a physics-conforming variant with the same latent flow but an additional dissipation penalty. For a source latent state zs = e(x(s)), the latent evolution is zt ≈ ms→t(zs) = exp  (t − s)W zs.24 Fig. 6 : Gradient-flow Rosenbrock example. Left: relative prediction error for the unconstrained Latent Twin ˜Ψ( t, s, x s) and the dissipative Latent Twin Ψ( t, s, x s), with the shaded region indicating the training horizon. Right: representative trajectory in the Rosenbrock landscape. Both models are accurate on the training range, while the dissipative model remains closer to the true trajectory under extrapolation. The dissipative model is trained with an additional penalty 

Lconf = ∥ms→t(zs)∥2 − ∥ zs∥22+ with λconf = 1 ,

which penalizes forward-time expansion in the latent norm. All models are trained with Adam using batch size 1024, learning rate 10 −3, and 2000 epochs, with the learning rate halved every 500 epochs. Figure 6 shows the relative prediction error and a representative phase portrait for the test initial condition xs = ( −0.5, −0.5). Both models track the trajectory accu-rately on the training horizon, while the extrapolation region beyond t = 10 separates their behavior. The unconstrained model can drift away from the Rosenbrock valley, whereas the dissipative model remains closer to the true gradient-flow trajectory. The large spike in relative error during the training window occurs near portions of the trajectory where the norm of the reference state is small, and should therefore be interpreted together with the phase portrait. The dissipative penalty also has the intended effect in latent space: after train-ing, violations of the nonexpansivity condition ∥ms→t(zs)∥2 ≤ ∥ zs∥2 are essentially eliminated for the physics-conforming model, while they persist for the unconstrained Latent Twin. 

# 4.3 PDEs 

We extend the framework to two canonical PDE systems on the periodic domain Ω = [0 , 2π]2: the heat equation, which is dissipative, and the wave equation, which is conservative Hamiltonian. Both are simulated using the spectral solver Dedalus 

[36] with periodic boundary conditions. Initial conditions are random smooth periodic 25 fields constructed from finite Fourier expansions with randomized amplitudes and phases. From each trajectory we extract snapshot pairs ( x(s), x (t)) with s ≤ t drawn uniformly, forming training pairs as in Section 4.1. The encoder and decoder are convolutional networks and the latent flow takes the exponential form ms→t(z) = exp(( t − s)W )z in both experiments. Models are pretrained for 20 epochs on the autoencoder loss and then trained jointly for 150 epochs with Adam at learning rate 3 × 10 −4 and batch size 64. 

4.3.1 Heat equation 

We next consider the two-dimensional heat equation ∂tu = κ∆u, which describes the diffusion of a scalar temperature field u(x, y, t ). On a periodic domain, the heat equation exhibits two complementary structural properties. First, the spatial mean M [u]( t) = R 

> Ω

u(x, y, t ) d x dy is conserved. Second, the L2 energy E[u]( t) = 

> 12

R 

> Ω

u(x, y, t )2 dx dy is monotonically dissipated, since ddt E[u]( t) = −κ

Z

> Ω

|∇ u(x, y, t )|2 dx dy ≤ 0.

This example therefore falls into the mixed constraint class described in Table 1: a linear conserved quantity together with a dissipative quadratic functional. For the latent model, we use latent dimension nz = 32 and a linear latent flow generated by an operator W . The physics-conforming parameterization decomposes 

W = K + S, K = A − A⊤, S = −BB ⊤ − 0.001 I, 

so that the symmetric part is negative definite and therefore induces latent energy decay. Conservation of the latent mass functional is enforced exactly by projecting the operator onto the constraint subspace satisfying W ⊤c = 0. Thus, the latent dynam-ics combine a conservative linear constraint with a dissipative quadratic structure, mirroring the physical behavior of the heat equation. The results show that this constrained latent flow accurately captures the diffusive evolution. In Figure 7, the predicted temperature fields remain visually indistinguish-able from the reference solution over the full rollout horizon. The model reproduces both the large-scale smoothing induced by diffusion and the gradual attenuation of high-frequency spatial features. The absolute errors remain small throughout the tra-jectory and are concentrated mainly in localized regions where the initial condition contains sharper spatial variations. The reconstruction and prediction plots further indicate that the autoencoder learns a stable low-dimensional representation of the heat dynamics: reconstruction errors are small, while the rollout errors remain controlled even after repeated prop-agation in latent space. This is particularly important for the heat equation, where an unconstrained latent model could easily introduce spurious growth or drift in the mean temperature. Finally, Figure 8 confirms that the learned dynamics respect the intended physical structure. The predicted total heat remains nearly constant along the rollout, while 26 t = 0 .02 t = 0 .73 t = 1 .43 t = 2 .16 t = 2 .86 t = 3 .59 t = 4 .30 t = 5 .00 

> Predicted True Abs. error

Fig. 7 : Heat equation rollout. Predicted temperature fields (row 1), true temperature fields (row 2), and absolute errors (row 3) at eight time snapshots over the horizon t ∈

[0 , 5]. The Physics-conforming Latent Twins accurately tracks the diffusive evolution, with small localized errors throughout the rollout. the latent energy decays monotonically, consistent with the dissipative character of the heat equation. Thus, the model does not only approximate the solution fields accurately; it also reproduces the qualitative conservation and dissipation laws that characterize the underlying PDE. 

4.3.2 Wave equation 

As a conservative PDE benchmark, we consider the wave equation in first-order form, 

∂tq = p, ∂tp = c2∆q, 

where q denotes the displacement field and p its velocity. In contrast to the heat equation, the wave equation is nondissipative: oscillatory spatial structures propagate through the domain rather than being smoothed out. On a periodic domain, the continuous dynamics conserve the Hamiltonian 

H[q, p ] = 12

Z

> Ω

 p2 + c2|∇ q|2 dx dy. 

Thus, the relevant physical structure is conservation of a quadratic energy functional. We encode this conservative structure by using a quadratic latent invariant. The latent dimension is set to nz = 64 to represent the two-field state ( q, p ). The latent dynamics are generated by a linear operator W parameterized as W = A − A⊤, so that W ⊤ + W = 0. Consequently, the latent flow preserves the quadratic latent energy exactly ddt 

> 12

∥z(t)∥2 = z(t)⊤W z (t) = 0. This hard architectural constraint prevents artificial latent damping or growth and mirrors the conservative character of the wave equation. 27 Fig. 8 : Conservation diagnostics for the heat Latent Twin. Top: L2-energy E[u]( t)for the true trajectory and the surrogate prediction, showing monotone decay in both. Bottom: spatial mean M [u]( t), which the physics-conforming model preserves to near-machine precision. Figures 9 and 10 show trajectory predictions for the displacement q and velocity 

p, respectively. The predicted fields closely match the reference trajectories over the full horizon t ∈ [0 , 5], including the persistence and transport of fine-scale oscillatory structures. The absolute errors remain small relative to the field amplitudes and are concentrated mainly near sharper spatial features and phase-sensitive regions. This is a more demanding setting than the heat equation, since errors are not naturally damped by the underlying dynamics. The diagnostics in Figure 11 further confirm the effect of the physics-conforming parameterization. The predicted Hamiltonian remains close to the true value over the full trajectory, while the latent quadratic invariant is conserved up to numeri-cal precision. The model therefore captures both the observed wave fields and the nondissipative structure of the underlying PDE. 

# 5 Conclusions and outlook 

We introduced Physics-conforming Latent Twins, a latent solution-operator frame-work for learning surrogate dynamics that respect selected physical structures by design. The central idea is to use the latent space not only as a compression space, but as the space in which conservation laws, invariants, admissibility conditions, and dissipative structures are represented and enforced. In this view, physical constraints are not merely diagnostics applied after prediction; they are organizing principles that 28 t = 0 .63 t = 1 .26 t = 1 .88 t = 2 .51 t = 3 .14 t = 3 .77 t = 4 .39 t = 5 .00 

> Predicted  qTrue  qAbs. error

Fig. 9 : Wave equation trajectory prediction for the displacement field q. Predicted fields (row 1), true fields (row 2), and absolute errors (row 3) are shown at eight time snapshots over t ∈ [0 , 5]. The physics-conforming Latent Twins captures the oscillatory wave dynamics with small localized errors. t = 0 .63 t = 1 .26 t = 1 .88 t = 2 .51 t = 3 .14 t = 3 .77 t = 4 .39 t = 5 .00 

> Predicted  pTrue  pAbs. error

Fig. 10 : Wave equation trajectory prediction for the velocity field p. Predicted fields (row 1), true fields (row 2), and absolute errors (row 3) are shown at eight time snapshots over t ∈ [0 , 5]. shape the class of admissible latent evolutions and, through decoding, the full surrogate dynamics in the physical state space. On the theoretical side, we developed a constraint-transfer perspective that relates structural functionals in the physical state space to compatible functionals in latent space. We first showed that standard Latent Twins inherit physical structure a pos-teriori whenever the surrogate trajectory is close to the exact trajectory. We then proved a sharper structure-preserving estimate showing that, when a compatible latent constraint is enforced directly by the latent flow, the resulting physical defect after decoding is controlled by the compatibility error and the autoencoder recon-struction error, rather than by the full trajectory approximation error. This provides 29 Fig. 11 : Conservation diagnostics for the wave Latent Twin. Top: normalized Hamil-tonian H(t)/H (0) for the true trajectory and surrogate prediction, with the predicted value deviating by approximately 2% from the reference over the full horizon. Bottom: relative latent norm variation ∥z(t)∥2/∥z(0) ∥2 − 1, confirming near-exact conservation of the quadratic latent invariant induced by the skew-symmetric latent operator. a theoretical justification for enforcing structure at the level of the latent dynam-ics, and motivates the numerical experiments in which conservative, dissipative, and invariant-preserving structures are imposed directly on the latent flow. The experiments demonstrate the proposed framework on representative ODE and PDE benchmarks, but the formulation is not restricted to these settings. Physics-conforming Latent Twins apply whenever time-indexed or sequential states can be encoded, propagated in latent space, and decoded back to a meaningful state repre-sentation. This includes classical dynamical systems, discretized PDEs, iterative opti-mization processes, data-assimilation pipelines, and more general operator-learning or surrogate-modeling tasks. The main practical role of physics-conforming latent dynamics is to organize the learned representation so that prediction accuracy and structural fidelity are pursued jointly. This addresses a central tension in scientific machine learning: reliable surrogates benefit from physical structure, but the useful form of that structure may only become apparent after choosing a representation in which the dynamics are simple enough to model. Physics-conforming Latent Twins approach this problem by learning the representation, the latent evolution, and the structural constraint together. Several limitations remain. First, compatibility between a prescribed latent con-straint CZ and the decoder-induced pullback of a physical constraint C is not automatic. It depends on the learned encoder–decoder pair and can be difficult to 30 guarantee for highly nonlinear decoders. Second, hard architectural constraints pro-vide strong preservation guarantees, but may reduce expressiveness if the chosen latent constraint class is not well matched to the physical structure after decoding. Third, the present theory primarily addresses global structural functionals, such as total mass, energy, or Lyapunov-type quantities, and does not yet guarantee local conservation laws or pointwise admissibility after reconstruction. Finally, the numerical experiments are intended as controlled demonstrations of the proposed design principles rather than exhaustive benchmarks across all possible surrogate-modeling settings. These limitations suggest several natural extensions. A first direction is to learn or adapt the latent constraint itself, rather than prescribing it from a fixed tractable class, so that CZ better approximates the decoder-induced pullback of the physical quantity while remaining enforceable by the latent flow. A second direction is to extend the framework to parameterized operator-learning settings, where the latent solution oper-ator depends on physical parameters, geometries, forcing terms, boundary conditions, or discretization levels. A third direction is to move beyond global invariants toward local conservation laws and spatially resolved balance relations, which are central in many continuum systems. More broadly, the framework points toward scientific foundation models built around reusable latent physics. Rather than pretraining only on large collections of trajectories, one could aim to learn latent evolution modules that encode general phys-ical principles, such as conservation, dissipation, stability, or admissibility, and then adapt them to new systems, parameters, geometries, or observation settings. In this broader view, latent spaces are not merely compression spaces; they become physi-cally organized spaces in which scientific machine learning models can predict, infer, and control dynamics while respecting the principles that define admissible behavior. 

# References 

[1] Noether, E.: Invarianten beliebiger differentialausdr¨ ucke – invariante variation-sprobleme. Nachrichten von der Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu G¨ ottingen, Mathematisch-Physikalische Klasse 1918 , 37–44 (1918) [2] Noether, E.: Invariante Variationsprobleme. In: Jacobson, N. (ed.) Gesammelte Abhandlungen-collected Papers, pp. 231–239. Springer, Berlin (1983) [3] Chung, M., Verma, D., Collins, M., Subrahmanya, A.N., Katti Sastry, V., Rao, V.: Latent twins. Machine Learning: Science and Technology 7(2), 025039 (2026) [4] Benner, P., Gugercin, S., Willcox, K.: A survey of projection-based model reduc-tion methods for parametric dynamical systems. SIAM review 57 (4), 483–531 (2015) [5] Hesthaven, J.S., Rozza, G., Stamm, B.: Certified Reduced Basis Methods for Parametrized Partial Differential Equations. SpringerBriefs in Mathematics. Springer, Cham (2016) 31 [6] Koopman, B.O.: Hamiltonian systems and transformation in hilbert space. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 17 (5), 315–318 (1931) [7] Mezi´ c, I.: Spectral properties of dynamical systems, model reduction and decom-positions. Nonlinear Dynamics 41 (1), 309–325 (2005) [8] Schmid, P.J.: Dynamic mode decomposition of numerical and experimental data. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 656 , 5–28 (2010) [9] Kutz, J.N., Brunton, S.L., Brunton, B.W., Proctor, J.L.: Dynamic Mode Decom-position: Data-Driven Modeling of Complex Systems. SIAM, Philadelphia (2016) [10] Lusch, B., Kutz, J.N., Brunton, S.L.: Deep learning for universal linear embed-dings of nonlinear dynamics. Nature communications 9(1), 4950 (2018) [11] Takeishi, N., Kawahara, Y., Yairi, T.: Learning koopman invariant subspaces for dynamic mode decomposition. Advances in neural information processing systems 

30 (2017) [12] Brunton, S.L., Proctor, J.L., Kutz, J.N.: Discovering governing equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. Proceedings of the national academy of sciences 113 (15), 3932–3937 (2016) [13] Rudy, S.H., Brunton, S.L., Proctor, J.L., Kutz, J.N.: Data-driven discovery of partial differential equations. Science advances 3(4), 1602614 (2017) [14] Schaeffer, H.: Learning partial differential equations via data discovery and sparse optimization. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 473 (2197) (2017) [15] Kaheman, K., Kutz, J.N., Brunton, S.L.: Sindy-pi: a robust algorithm for parallel implicit sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 476 (2242) (2020) [16] Reinbold, P.A., Gurevich, D.R., Grigoriev, R.O.: Using noisy or incomplete data to discover models of spatiotemporal dynamics. Physical Review E 101 (1), 010203 (2020) [17] Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., Karniadakis, G.E.: Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations. Journal of Computational physics 378 ,686–707 (2019) [18] Baez, A., Zhang, W., Ma, M., Das, S., Nguyen, L., Daniel, L.: Guaranteeing conservation laws with projection in physics-informed neural networks. In: Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2024) [19] Patel, R.G., Manickam, I., Trask, N.A., Wood, M.A., Lee, M., Tomas, I., 32 Cyr, E.C.: Thermodynamically consistent physics-informed neural networks for hyperbolic systems. Journal of Computational Physics 449 , 110754 (2022) [20] Greydanus, S., Dzamba, M., Yosinski, J.: Hamiltonian neural networks. In: Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 32 (2019) [21] Lu, L., Jin, P., Pang, G., Zhang, Z., Karniadakis, G.E.: Learning nonlinear oper-ators via deeponet based on the universal approximation theorem of operators. Nature machine intelligence 3(3), 218–229 (2021) [22] Li, Z., Kovachki, N., Azizzadenesheli, K., Liu, B., Bhattacharya, K., Stuart, A., Anandkumar, A.: Fourier neural operator for parametric partial differential equations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.08895 (2020) [23] Kovachki, N., Li, Z., Liu, B., Azizzadenesheli, K., Bhattacharya, K., Stuart, A., Anandkumar, A.: Neural operator: Learning maps between function spaces with applications to pdes. Journal of Machine Learning Research 24 (89), 1–97 (2023) [24] Fries, W.D., He, X., Choi, Y.: Lasdi: Parametric latent space dynamics identifi-cation. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 399 , 115436 (2022) [25] He, X., Choi, Y., Fries, W.D., Belof, J.L., Chen, J.-S.: glasdi: Parametric physics-informed greedy latent space dynamics identification. Journal of Computational Physics 489 , 112267 (2023) [26] Tran, A., He, X., Messenger, D.A., Choi, Y., Bortz, D.M.: Weak-form latent space dynamics identification. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 427 , 116998 (2024) [27] Park, J.S.R., Cheung, S.W., Choi, Y., Shin, Y.: tlasdi: Thermodynamics-informed latent space dynamics identification. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 429 , 117144 (2024) [28] Chen, P.Y., Xiang, J., Cho, D.H., Chang, Y., Pershing, G., Maia, H.T., Chiaramonte, M.M., Carlberg, K., Grinspun, E.: Crom: Continuous reduced-order modeling of pdes using implicit neural representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.02607 (2022) [29] Serrano, L., Le Boudec, L., Kassa¨ ı Koupa¨ ı, A., Wang, T.X., Yin, Y., Vittaut, J.-N., Gallinari, P.: Operator learning with neural fields: Tackling pdes on general geometries. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 , 70581–70611 (2023) [30] Yin, Y., Kirchmeyer, M., Franceschi, J.-Y., Rakotomamonjy, A., Gallinari, P.: Continuous pde dynamics forecasting with implicit neural representations. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14855 (2022) 33 [31] Sitzmann, V., Martel, J., Bergman, A., Lindell, D., Wetzstein, G.: Implicit neural representations with periodic activation functions. Advances in neural information processing systems 33 , 7462–7473 (2020) [32] Chung, M., Archibald, R., Atzberger, P., Solomon, J.M.: Sparse l 1-autoencoders for scientific data compression. Journal of Machine Learning for Modeling and Computing 6(4) (2025) [33] Murray, J.D.: Mathematical Biology: I. An Introduction, 3rd edn. Interdisci-plinary Applied Mathematics, vol. 17. Springer, New York (2007) [34] Khalil, H.K.: Nonlinear Systems, 3rd edn. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ (2002) [35] Hairer, E., Wanner, G.: Solving Ordinary Differential Equations II: Stiff and Differential-Algebraic Problems. Springer Series in Computational Mathematics, vol. 14. Springer, Berlin (1996) [36] Burns, K.J., Vasil, G.M., Oishi, J.S., Lecoanet, D., Brown, B.P.: Dedalus: A flexi-ble framework for numerical simulations with spectral methods. Physical Review Research 2(2), 023068 (2020) [37] Hethcote, H.W.: The mathematics of infectious diseases. SIAM review 42 (4), 599–653 (2000) [38] Rowley, C.W., Colonius, T., Murray, R.M.: Model reduction for compressible flows using pod and galerkin projection. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 189 (1-2), 115–129 (2004) 34