Title: Persistent and Conversational Multi-Method Explainability for Trustworthy Financial AI

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.11687v1

Published Time: Wed, 13 May 2026 00:50:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
# Persistent and Conversational Multi-Method Explainability for Trustworthy Financial AI 

Georgios Makridis ∗, Georgios Fatouros ∗, John Soldatos ∗, George Katsis ∗, Dimosthenis Kyriazis †

University of Piraeus, Greece 

∗ExpertAI-Lux S.à r.l, †Department of Digital Systems {george.makridis, george.fatouros, john.soldatos, george.katsis}@expertai-lux.com, dimos@unipi.gr 

Abstract —Financial institutions increasingly require AI expla-nations that are persistent, cross-validated across methods, and conversationally accessible to human decision-makers. We present an architecture for human-centered explainable AI in financial sentiment analysis that combines three contributions. First, we treat XAI artifacts—LIME feature attributions, occlusion-based word importance scores, and saliency heatmaps—as persistent, searchable objects in distributed S3-compatible storage with structured metadata and natural-language summaries, enabling semantic retrieval over explanation history and automatic index re-construction after system failures. Second, we enable multi-method explanation triangulation, where a retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) assistant compares and synthesizes results from multiple XAI methods applied to the same prediction, allowing users to assess explanation robustness through natural-language dialogue. Third, we evaluate the faithfulness of generated explanations using automated checks over grounding completeness, hallucinated claims, and method-attribution behavior. We demonstrate the architecture on an EXTRA-BRAIN financial sentiment analysis pipeline using FinBERT predictions and present evaluation results showing that constrained prompting reduces hallucination rate by 36% and increases method-attribution citations by 73% compared to naive prompting. We discuss implications for trustworthy, human-centered AI services in regulated financial environments. 

Index Terms —Explainable AI, Financial Sentiment Analy-sis, Retrieval-Augmented Generation, Faithfulness Evaluation, Human-Centered AI, Trustworthy AI 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Explainable AI (XAI) has become a regulatory and practical necessity in financial services, driven by the EU AI Act [1] and growing institutional demand for auditable decision support [2]. Financial sentiment analysis—classifying news headlines as positive, negative, or neutral—is a canonical use case where transformer-based models such as FinBERT [3] achieve high accuracy but operate as opaque classifiers. Prior work [4] demonstrated that LLM-based approaches can substantially outperform FinBERT in financial sentiment classification, yet the resulting predictions remain equally opaque to end-users. Post-hoc explanation methods including LIME [5], occlusion-based word importance, and attention analysis are routinely applied to such models [6], yet three fundamental challenges remain unaddressed in practice. 

Challenge 1: Explanation ephemerality. In current XAI pipelines, explanations are generated on demand, rendered as static visualizations, and discarded. They are not stored as persistent, searchable records and cannot be queried across sessions, compared over time, or reconstructed after system failures. This makes compliance auditing and longitudinal explanation analysis impractical—a concern particularly acute in digital finance, where regulatory requirements demand auditable decision trails [1]. While provenance-aware frame-works [7], [8] and XAI-as-a-service platforms [9], [10] have begun treating explanations as managed artifacts, none provide a fully persistent, semantically searchable explanation store with automatic reconstruction. 

Challenge 2: Single-method fragility. [11] formally demon-strated that popular XAI methods—LIME, KernelSHAP, In-tegrated Gradients, attention—routinely disagree on the same instance. Recent FinBERT-specific evaluation confirms this on financial text, finding that LIME, Integrated Gradients, and attention rollout produce divergent attribution rankings [12]. If a user sees only one explanation method, they receive an incomplete and potentially misleading picture of model behavior. 

Challenge 3: Conversational XAI faithfulness. Conversa-tional XAI systems [13]–[16] allow users to query explanations in natural language. However, [17] demonstrated that LLM-driven explanation chat can amplify over-reliance through an “illusion of explanatory depth”—the assistant sounds authori-tative regardless of whether its claims are grounded in actual XAI evidence. Without automated faithfulness verification [18], [19], fluent but unfaithful explanation narratives erode trust rather than building it. 

Contributions. We present a microservice architecture that addresses all three challenges simultaneously: 1) Persistent XAI artifact store : Explanation outputs are stored as structured metadata in S3-compatible object storage with natural-language summaries, enabling semantic vector search over explanation history and automatic index reconstruction after container restarts (Section III). 2) Multi-method explanation triangulation : LIME, occlu-sion, and saliency are applied to the same prediction and their results are jointly indexed, enabling a RAG chatbot to compare, contrast, and synthesize them in response to user questions (Section IV). 3) Faithfulness-constrained RAG : Generated explanations are grounded in retrieved XAI artifacts through constrained prompting and evaluated using automated faithfulness metrics (Section V). The system is developed within the EXTRA-BRAIN Hori-zon Europe project for digital finance and demonstrated on 

> arXiv:2605.11687v1 [cs.AI] 12 May 2026

FinBERT-based news sentiment classification with per-sample and dataset-level XAI capabilities. II. R ELATED WORK 

XAI for Financial NLP. Post-hoc explanation of financial transformer models has been extensively studied. In [20] SHAP was used over FinBERT to automatically induce explainable finance lexicons. In our prior work [6] we extended XAI to time-series classification using image highlight methods (LIME and Grad-CAM) applied to 2D plot representations—a cross-modal approach that informs our saliency-based vision XAI. In [4] the authors benchmarked ChatGPT against FinBERT for financial sentiment, showing 35% improved classification but highlighting the need for interpretability of LLM-based predictions. [21] proposed VirtualXAI, a framework that integrates quantitative XAI benchmarking with qualitative user assessments through GPT-generated virtual personas— establishing the user-centric evaluation methodology that informs our design. A comprehensive study applying five XAI methods—LIME, SHAP, attention, Integrated Gradients, and Grad-CAM—in parallel to the same sentiment model [22] provides the closest blueprint for multi-method triangulation. The 2025 FinBERT faithfulness audit [12] quantified deletion-curve faithfulness across LIME, Integrated Gradients, and attention rollout, finding LIME most faithful on financial text. Our work extends this line by exposing multi-method results interactively rather than as static evaluation tables. 

Conversational XAI. TalkToModel [13] pioneered interac-tive natural-language explanations, outperforming dashboard XAI in user studies. ConvXAI [14] unified heterogeneous explanation types under conversational design principles, while InterroLang [15] extended the approach to NLP models. More recent systems such as LLMCheckup [16] and Explingo [23] replaced rule-based intent parsing with LLM orchestration; a comprehensive survey [24] maps the design space across 15 core systems. [25] proposed HumAIne-Chatbot, a personalized conversational AI with reinforcement learning that adapts explanation delivery to user profiles. The authors of [17] found that LLM-driven explanation chat can amplify over-reliance— motivating our faithfulness-constrained design. 

RAG Faithfulness Evaluation. RAGAs [18] introduced reference-free metrics for faithfulness, relevance, and con-text quality. ARES [26] fine-tuned lightweight judges with prediction-powered inference. RAGTruth [27] provided word-level hallucination annotations for supervised detection. RAGChecker [19] decomposed evaluation into claim-level faithfulness and noise sensitivity metrics. FActScore [28] established atomic-level groundedness scoring. We adapt these principles to the XAI domain, where “faithfulness” means that the chatbot does not invent features, misattribute explanation methods, or fabricate confidence values. 

Persistent XAI Artifacts. This is the sparsest area and our strongest novelty claim. [7] proposed provenance-enabled XAI (PXAI) using lineage graphs as queryable artifacts. [10] proposed Explainability-as-a-Service with semantic-similarity caching for edge AI. The principle of treating AI-generated 

Dashboard (Flask SPA) 

XAI Service (Flask) 

AI Outputs (RAG + VectorDB) 

XAI API (FastAPI) 

Model API (FinBERT) RustFS (S3 Storage)   

> ingest
> chat, store XAI calls
> predict
> persist
> store results
> rehydrate
> Fig. 1. System architecture. Solid arrows show runtime data flow; the dashed arrow represents automatic vector index reconstruction from persistent metadata on container restart.

artifacts as persistent, searchable, and personalizable records has been explored in adjacent domains such as education, where [29] demonstrated persistent personalized content gen-eration with LLMs, establishing the design pattern we extend to XAI artifacts. Our approach differs from all prior work by combining persistent S3 storage with automatic semantic rehydration of an in-memory vector index, enabling both bulk dataset explanations and per-sample XAI results to survive system failures and be searched conversationally. III. S YSTEM ARCHITECTURE 

The system consists of five Docker microservices orches-trated via Docker Compose, communicating over a shared network with a remote S3-compatible object store (RustFS) for persistent storage (Fig. 1). 

Dashboard (Flask + JavaScript SPA) serves the web UI with two primary tabs: Dataset Analysis for bulk model output visualization across the full dataset, and Per-Sample XAI for individual prediction explanations. It proxies all API calls and handles authentication via Keycloak OIDC or legacy mode. 

XAI Service (Flask) performs bulk data ingestion, prepro-cessing, and dataset-level statistical visualization (sentiment distributions, keyword analysis, asset-level box plots). It holds the ingested data frame in memory and provides a per-sample browsing interface to the Dashboard. 

XAI API (FastAPI) implements the per-sample explanation algorithms: occlusion-based word importance, LIME [5] text explanations, and occlusion-based saliency maps for vision-based tasks. For each request it retrieves the relevant data from the artifact store, calls the Model API—potentially hundreds of times for perturbation-based methods—and persists the full result as structured JSON or PNG back to the store. 

Model API serves modular prediction endpoints for the supported domains: sentiment classification [3] and, as an extensibility demonstration, object detection. This component is designed for straightforward replacement with production models. AI Outputs (Flask) is the RAG engine. It maintains an in-memory vector database (SimpleVectorDB with OpenAI embeddings) and conversation history. It supports question answering over stored explanation artifacts, indexing of newly generated XAI summaries, and persistence of plot images with associated metadata. 

A. Persistent XAI Artifact Store 

The core architectural innovation is treating every explana-tion output as a persistent, searchable artifact rather than an ephemeral visualization. The artifact store organizes outputs across logically separated buckets for rendered visualization images, structured metadata records, and uploaded or exported datasets. Domain-specific results—text-based attribution scores and vision saliency maps—are stored in dedicated result buckets, keeping the provenance trail clean across modalities. Each metadata record follows a consistent schema that captures provenance fields (model identifier, XAI method, timestamp) alongside storage references and a natural-language summary object used for semantic retrieval:                    

> {"plot_type": "text_occlusion", "title": "Occlusion --sample #5", "summary_for_rag": {"text": "Target: positive. Top words: outperformer (+0.245), growth (+0.156)", "keywords": ["occlusion", "positive"], "numeric_facts": {"baseline": 0.912}}, "provenance": {"model": "finbert", "xai_method": "occlusion"}}

The plot_type field is set at ingestion time by the expla-nation module and acts as a method tag used during retrieval; any new XAI method can be integrated by registering a new type value without modifying the storage schema. 

B. Automatic Rehydration 

The vector database resides in RAM and is lost on container restart. A lightweight rehydration mechanism detects an empty collection for the requesting user on the first conversational query after restart: it scans all stored metadata records for that user, extracts the natural-language summary field from each, computes its embedding, and inserts it into the vector index. This process is transparent to the user—the first query after a restart incurs a one-time latency 1 after which all subsequent searches operate from RAM at sub-millisecond latency. IV. M ULTI -M ETHOD EXPLANATION TRIANGULATION 

A key insight motivating our design is that multiple XAI methods applied to the same prediction often disagree [11]. Rather than resolving this disagreement computationally, we ex-pose it to the user through conversational interaction, enabling what we term explanation triangulation .For text sentiment classification, the system provides two complementary per-sample methods: 

> 1Measured on our deployment: 0.8 s for 15 artifacts, 1.4 s for 50 artifacts, 2.1 s for 100 artifacts (single-threaded, remote RustFS over HTTPS).

Occlusion. Each word is masked individually and the model re-queried; the importance of word wi is the drop in target-class probability: imp (wi) = P (c∗ | x) − P (c∗ | x\i). This produces a complete attribution over all words, sorted by absolute importance. 

LIME. A neighbourhood of perturbed texts is generated by randomly removing words, the model is queried on all perturbations, and a local linear model is fitted. The coefficients of the top-k features constitute the explanation [5]. Both methods are applied to the same sample, and their results are independently indexed in the vector database with method-specific type tags. When the user asks the RAG chatbot a comparative question such as “Do the XAI methods agree on the most important words?” , the retrieval step returns both artifacts (matched by semantic similarity), and the constrained prompt (Section V) generates a response that explicitly cites which method produced which attribution, surfaces agreements and disagreements, and avoids conflating the two. For vision tasks, the system provides occlusion-based saliency: a patch slides across the image, the model is re-queried at each position, and the confidence drop is mapped to a heat map. This component serves as an extensibility demonstration— validating that the persistent-artifact and RAG architecture generalises beyond NLP to vision tasks—and is not covered by the quantitative evaluation, which focuses on the financial sentiment use case. An illustrative example from our financial sentiment dataset: for the headline “BioNTech forecasts strong growth in oncology pipeline” , occlusion identified strong (importance +0 .312 ) and 

growth (+0 .287 ) as the top contributors, while LIME ranked 

growth (+0 .289 ) first and strong (+0 .195 ) third, with forecasts 

(+0 .201 ) intervening. The chatbot synthesises this as: “Both methods agree that ‘growth’ strongly supports the positive prediction. However, occlusion assigns higher importance to ‘strong’ than LIME does, while LIME elevates ‘forecasts’ as a contributing factor that occlusion considers less significant.” 

This cross-validation surfaces explanation robustness—or its absence— through natural dialogue rather than requiring the user to compare static tables. V. F AITHFULNESS EVALUATION 

Following the finding that LLM-driven XAI chat can amplify over-reliance [17], we implement a faithfulness evaluation pipeline that measures whether generated explanations are grounded in the actual XAI artifacts retrieved by the RAG system. 

A. Constrained vs. Naive Prompting 

We compare two prompting strategies: 

Naive baseline: The retrieved XAI documents are placed in the LLM context with a generic instruction: “Answer the user’s question based on the following context.” 

Constrained prompt: The system prompt explicitly requires: (i) cite specific XAI artifacts by method and explanation type; (ii) distinguish between LIME and occlusion results when both are present; (iii) include numeric values (confidence scores, TABLE I FAITHFULNESS EVALUATION : CONSTRAINED VS . NAIVE PROMPTING           

> (n= 30 QUERIES )
> Metric Naive Constrained
> Hallucination rate ( ↓)0.14 0.09
> Citations per response ( ↑)5.1 8.9
> Grounding completeness ( ↑)0.49 0.37 ∗∗Constrained prompting produces more specific numeric claims; with limited ground-truth coverage, additional claims reduce the grounding ratio despite being contextually appropriate. See discussion in text.

importance weights) directly from the retrieved documents; (iv) state when evidence is insufficient rather than speculating. 

B. Faithfulness Metrics 

We adapt RAG faithfulness principles [18], [19], [28] to the XAI domain with three automated rule-based checks applied to each generated response:  

> •

Grounding completeness : fraction of numeric claims in the response that can be traced to a retrieved XAI artifact (word importance scores, confidence values, or dataset statistics).  

> •

Hallucination rate : fraction of feature names mentioned as “important” in the response that do not appear in any retrieved document.  

> •

Citation behavior : number of explicit method attributions (e.g., “according to LIME. . . ”, “the occlusion analysis shows. . . ”) per response. 

C. Results 

Table I summarizes results from 30 evaluation queries spanning single-method questions (10 queries, e.g., “What were the most important words?”), comparative multi-method questions (5 queries, e.g., “Do the methods agree?”), adversarial probes (5 queries referencing non-existent features), and dataset-level questions (10 queries about distributions and statistics). The ground truth comprises 11 word importance scores (4 top occlusion tokens, 7 top LIME tokens, with 2 overlapping) and 15 distinct explanation types from the Vector DB. Constrained prompting reduces the hallucination rate from 14% to 9% (36% relative improvement), indicating that explicit grounding instructions effectively prevent the LLM from inventing feature names. Citation behavior shows the largest effect: 8.9 explicit method attributions per response versus 5.1 for naive prompting (73% increase), confirming that the constrained prompt encourages method-specific language. Grounding completeness presents a nuanced result: naive prompting (0.49) outperforms constrained (0.37). The con-strained prompt instructs the LLM to cite exact numeric values, producing more numeric claims per response. However, with only 11 word importance scores in the ground truth and no standalone numeric values, many additional claims cannot be verified, lowering the ratio. This highlights that faithfulness evaluation requires comprehensive ground-truth coverage; future work should persist richer structured metadata alongside natural-language summaries. We note that this evaluation uses rule-based automated checks with a modest test set; a larger-scale evaluation with LLM-based judges [26] and human annotation would provide stronger statistical guarantees. VI. D ISCUSSION 

Practical implications. The persistent artifact store enables a new class of XAI workflows: longitudinal explanation auditing (“how has the model’s reliance on word X changed over the last month?”), cross-user explanation comparison, and automated regulatory reporting. Building on prior risk-aware financial AI work [30], which demonstrated probabilistic deep learning for portfolio risk assessment, this architecture adds the explainability layer that regulators increasingly demand— ensuring that not only the predictions but also their explanations are persistent, auditable, and recoverable. 

Relation to the EU AI Act. Article 13 of the EU AI Act [1] requires high-risk AI systems to provide “sufficiently trans-parent” outputs. Our architecture operationalizes this through persistent, method-attributed, searchable explanations with provenance metadata, offering a concrete technical pathway toward compliance. 

Limitations. Our faithfulness evaluation uses rule-based checks rather than learned judges [26]; extending to LLM-based evaluation would improve coverage. The vector database uses simple cosine-similarity search; production deployment would benefit from approximate nearest-neighbor indices. While we demonstrate triangulation between two text XAI methods, the framework naturally extends to SHAP, Integrated Gradients, and counterfactuals [31]. Finally, a user study following established HCXAI protocols [32], [33] would provide complementary evidence on user trust and comprehension. 

Broader applicability. While demonstrated on financial sen-timent, the architecture is domain-agnostic. The same persistent-artifact, multi-method, faithfulness-constrained RAG pattern applies to clinical NLP, manufacturing defect detection [34], or any setting where explanation auditability, robustness, and conversational accessibility are required. VII. C ONCLUSION 

We presented a human-centered XAI architecture for finan-cial AI that addresses three gaps in current practice: explanation ephemerality, single-method fragility, and conversational faith-fulness. By treating XAI artifacts as persistent, searchable objects with structured metadata, enabling multi-method expla-nation triangulation through a RAG chatbot, and constraining generated explanations with automated faithfulness checks, the system provides auditable, robust, and accessible explanations suitable for regulated financial environments. Evaluation shows that constrained prompting reduces hallucination by 36% and increases method-attribution citations by 73% compared to naive prompting, while also revealing that comprehensive ground-truth coverage is essential for meaningful grounding evaluation. Future work will extend the faithfulness evaluation with LLM-based judges, conduct controlled user studies with financial analysts, and enrich the persistent metadata schema to improve ground-truth coverage for automated evaluation. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This work has been supported by the EXTRA-BRAIN project, funded by the European Union’s Horizon Europe programme under Grant Agreement No. 101135809. REFERENCES [1] “Regulation (EU) 2024/1689 laying down harmonised rules on artificial intelligence (AI act),” Official Journal of the European Union , 2024. [2] A. Wilson, “Explainable AI in finance: Addressing the needs of diverse stakeholders,” 2025. [3] D. Araci, “Finbert: Financial sentiment analysis with pre-trained language models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.10063 , 2019. [4] G. Fatouros, J. Soldatos, K. Kouroumali, G. Makridis, and D. Kyriazis, “Transforming sentiment analysis in the financial domain with ChatGPT,” 

Machine Learning with Applications , vol. 14, p. 100508, 2023. [5] M. T. Ribeiro, S. Singh, and C. Guestrin, “Why should I trust you?: Explaining the predictions of any classifier,” 2016. [6] G. Makridis, G. Fatouros, V. Koukos, D. Kotios, D. Kyriazis, and J. Soldatos, “XAI for time-series classification leveraging image highlight methods,” in Management of Digital EcoSystems (MEDES 2023) , ser. CCIS, vol. 2022. Springer, 2024. [7] S. Zhang, J. Zhou, and B. Ujcich, “Provenance-enabled explainable AI,” in SIGMOD , vol. 2, no. 6, 2024. [8] G. Kale, D. Nguyen, R. Harris, C. Li, S. Zhang, and Y. Ma, “Provenance documentation to enable explainable and trustworthy AI: A literature review,” Data Intelligence , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 139–162, 2023. [9] Y. Wang et al. , “XAIport: A service framework for the early adoption of XAI in AI model development,” in ICSE-NIER , 2024. [10] R. Singh and S. Roy, “Scalable explainability-as-a-service (XaaS) for edge AI systems,” arXiv:2602.04120 , 2026. [11] S. Krishna, T. Han, A. Gu, J. Pombra, S. Jabbari, S. Wu, and H. Lakkaraju, “The disagreement problem in explainable machine learning: A practi-tioner’s perspective,” Transactions on Machine Learning Research , 2024, arXiv:2202.01602. [12] “Fine-tuning and explaining FinBERT for sector-specific financial news: A reproducible workflow,” Electronics , vol. 14, no. 23, p. 4680, 2025. [13] D. Slack, S. Krishna, H. Lakkaraju, and S. Singh, “Explaining machine learning models with interactive natural language conversations using TalkToModel,” Nature Machine Intelligence , vol. 5, pp. 873–883, 2023. [14] Z. Shen, Q. Huang, K. Wu, and T. Huang, “ConvXAI: Delivering heterogeneous AI explanations via conversations to support human-AI scientific writing,” in CSCW Companion , 2023. [15] N. Feldhus, Q. Wang, N. Anikina, A. Chopra, T. Oguz, and S. Möller, “InterroLang: Exploring NLP models and datasets through dialogue-based explanations,” in Findings of EMNLP , 2023. [16] Q. Wang, N. Anikina, N. Feldhus, J. van Genabith, L. Hennig, and S. Möller, “LLMCheckup: Conversational examination of large language models via interpretability tools and self-explanations,” in NAACL HCINLP Workshop , 2024. [17] G. He, A. Aishwarya, and U. Gadiraju, “Is conversational XAI all you need? human-AI decision making with a conversational XAI assistant,” in Proc. ACM IUI , 2025. [18] S. Es et al. , “RAGAs: Automated evaluation of retrieval augmented generation,” in EACL Demos , 2024. [19] D. Ru et al. , “RAGChecker: A fine-grained framework for diagnosing retrieval-augmented generation,” in NeurIPS Datasets and Benchmarks ,2024. [20] M. Rizinski et al. , “Sentiment analysis in finance: From transformers back to explainable lexicons (XLex),” IEEE Access , 2024. [21] G. Makridis, V. Koukos, G. Fatouros, M. M. Separdani, D. Kyriazis, and J. Soldatos, “VirtualXAI: A user-centric framework for explainability assessment leveraging GPT-generated personas,” in Proc. 21st Intl. Conf. Distributed Computing in Smart Systems and the Internet of Things (DCOSS-IoT) . IEEE, 2025. [22] “Explainable aspect-based sentiment analysis using transformer models,” 

Big Data and Cognitive Computing , vol. 8, no. 11, p. 141, 2024. [23] A. Zytek et al. , “Explingo: Explaining AI predictions using large language models,” in IEEE BigData , 2024, arXiv:2412.05145. [24] “Beyond one-shot explanations: A systematic literature review of dialogue-based xAI approaches,” Artificial Intelligence Review , vol. 58, 2025. [25] G. Makridis, V. Fragiadakis, H. Oliveira, P. Saraiva, P. Mavrepis, G. Fatouros, and D. Kyriazis, “HumAIne-Chatbot: Real-time personalized conversational AI via reinforcement learning,” arXiv:2509.04303 , 2025. [26] J. Saad-Falcon et al. , “ARES: An automated evaluation framework for retrieval-augmented generation systems,” in NAACL , 2024. [27] C. Niu, H. Wu et al. , “RAGTruth: A hallucination corpus for developing trustworthy retrieval-augmented language models,” in ACL , 2024. [28] S. Min et al. , “FActScore: Fine-grained atomic evaluation of factual precision in long form text generation,” in EMNLP , 2023. [29] G. Makridis, A. Oikonomou, and V. Koukos, “FairyLandAI: Personalized fairy tales utilizing ChatGPT and DALL-E 3,” arXiv:2407.09467 , 2024. [30] G. Fatouros, G. Makridis, D. Kotios, J. Soldatos, M. Filippakis, and D. Kyriazis, “DeepVaR: A framework for portfolio risk assessment leveraging probabilistic deep neural networks,” Digital Finance , vol. 5, pp. 29–56, 2023. [31] Y. Rong, T. Leemann et al. , “Towards human-centered explainable AI: A survey of user studies for model explanations,” IEEE TPAMI , 2024. [32] R. R. Hoffman, S. T. Mueller, G. Klein, and J. Litman, “Measures for explainable AI: Explanation goodness, user satisfaction, mental models, curiosity, trust, and human-AI performance,” Frontiers in Computer Science , vol. 5, 2023. [33] U. Ehsan, K. Passi, Q. V. Liao, L. Chan, I. Lee, M. Muller, and M. O. Riedl, “The who in XAI: How AI background shapes perceptions of AI explanations,” 2024. [34] G. Makridis et al. , “XAI enhancing cyber defence against adversarial attacks in industrial applications,” in IEEE 5th Intl. Conf. Image Processing Applications and Systems (IPAS) , 2022, pp. 1–8.