Title: Discovery of Nonlinear Dynamics with Automated Basis Function Generation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.09696v1

Published Time: Tue, 12 May 2026 02:15:24 GMT

Number of Pages: 53

Markdown Content:
Discovery of Nonlinear Dynamics with Automated Basis Function Generation 

Mohammad Amin Basiri 1, ∗ and Charles Nicholson 1, 2, †

> 1

Data Science and Analytics Institute, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA 

> 2

School of Industrial and Systems Engineering, University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK, USA 

(Dated: May 12, 2026) 

1

> arXiv:2605.09696v1 [cs.LG] 10 May 2026

Abstract 

Discovering governing equations from observational data remains a fundamental challenge in scientific modeling, particularly when the underlying mathematical structure is unknown. Tra-ditional sparse identification methods like SINDy excel at discovering parsimonious models but require researchers to specify candidate basis functions a priori , a limitation that often leads to model failure when critical terms are omitted or when systems exhibit unconventional dynamics. Purely symbolic regression approaches offer unlimited flexibility but struggle with noise sensitiv-ity and frequently produce overly complex, unstable equations. We present AutoSINDy , a hy-brid Discovery-then-Solve framework that combines the exploratory power of symbolic regression with the robust sparsity-promoting capabilities of SINDy . Our method operates in three stages: (1) PySR -based symbolic regression discovers candidate functional forms from bootstrapped data chunks; (2) a curation pipeline decomposes, expands, and filters these expressions using collinearity analysis to construct a minimal yet comprehensive library; and (3) SINDy identifies sparse govern-ing equations from this custom-tailored library. Extensive experiments across canonical nonlinear systems (oscillatory, chaotic, etc.) demonstrate that AutoSINDy consistently recovers ground-truth equations even under high observational noise, achieving a ground-truth recovery rate of 92.8% across all trials. Compared with standard SINDy using enriched libraries and standalone symbolic regression, AutoSINDy achieves higher predictive accuracy, superior generalization to unseen trajectories, and substantially lower symbolic complexity. These results show that Au-toSINDy successfully identifies correct governing terms without prior domain knowledge, effec-tively automating the feature-engineering bottleneck in system identification and offering a scalable pathway for discovering complex dynamics in biological and physical systems where the mathemat-ical form is unknown. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The discovery of governing mathematical equations from observational data is one of the deepest aspirations of the scientific method. From Johannes Kepler, who inferred the laws of planetary motion from decades of astronomical records, to Newton formulating the clas-  

> ∗ma.basiri@ou.edu
> †cnicholson@ou.edu

2sical mathematical description of universal gravitation and the laws of motion [1], scientists have long sought compact, interpretable models that reveal the mechanistic structure be-neath experimental observations. Today, this ambition is being transformed and accelerated by the rise of scientific machine learning. Artificial intelligence and data-driven modeling are now deeply integrated into the entire scientific workflow, from automated hypothesis generation and experimental design to the discovery of novel physical laws directly from high-dimensional, multivariate time-series data [2, 3]. The governing equations of dynami-cal systems occupy a privileged position in this landscape: they are the ultimate compressed representation of a physical or biological process, encoding causality, generalizability, and mechanistic interpretability in a form that no black-box model can provide. Recovering these equations from data has profound implications across domains where first-principles derivations are intractable, such as fluid mechanics [4], plasma physics [5], climate models [6], neuroscience [7], and systems biology [8]. As both the volume of scientific data and the com-putational power available for analysis continue to grow, the need for principled, automated, and assumption-free methods for equation discovery has never been more urgent. Two dominant and complementary paradigms have emerged for data-driven discovery of governing equations: sparse regression-based identification and symbolic regression. The Sparse Identification of Nonlinear Dynamics ( SINDy ) framework, introduced by Brunton, Proctor, and Kutz [9], formulates equation discovery as a sparse regression problem over a user-specified library of candidate functions. Assuming that most dynamical systems can be described by only a few active terms from a large dictionary of possible nonlinearities, 

SINDy applies sequentially thresholded least squares (STLSQ) to identify the minimal sub-set of library functions that best fits the measured time derivatives of the state. This elegant formulation produces interpretable, parsimonious models and requires substantially less data than neural-network-based approaches. Its generalization to partial differential equations (PDEs) via PDE-FIND [10] further broadened its scope, and the open-source PySINDy 

ecosystem [11, 12] has consolidated a rich family of extensions, including SINDy with con-trol inputs [13], implicit formulations for rational nonlinearities [14], and autoencoder-based coordinate discovery [15]. Subsequent innovations have markedly improved robustness and model selection: Sparse Relaxed Regularized Regression (SR3) [16] handles correlated library terms through a convex relaxation; weak-form SINDy [17] bypasses noisy derivative estima-tion by integrating against test functions; SINDy -AIC [18] applies the Akaike information 3criterion (AIC) to automatically select the most parsimonious model; and E-SINDy [19] leverages bootstrap aggregating (bagging) to identify probabilistic models robust to lim-ited data and high noise. In parallel, symbolic regression offers a fundamentally different and complementary approach: rather than selecting terms from a pre-built dictionary, it searches the space of mathematical expressions using evolutionary algorithms. Following the foundational work of Koza [20] and the landmark Eureqa platform of Schmidt and Lip-son [21], modern tools such as PySR [22] have established symbolic regression as a practical method for recovering governing equations across physical, biological, and epidemiological systems [23]. However, despite these significant advances, critical limitations prevent either paradigm from serving as a fully general-purpose solution for automated equation discovery. The cen-tral bottleneck of SINDy -based methods is their dependence on a user-specified candidate library: the correct governing terms must be anticipated and explicitly included prior to any regression. If a critical basis function is omitted, whether due to unconventional dynamics, unexpected nonlinearities, or genuine domain ignorance, the method fails to recover the true model regardless of the downstream optimizer [8, 24]. Enriching the library with an exhaustive set of candidate terms partially addresses omission errors but introduces severe multicollinearity among features, destabilizes sparse regression, and inflates coefficient un-certainty [16, 19]. A major remaining challenge is therefore to construct libraries that are simultaneously expressive enough to contain the true governing terms and compact enough to avoid redundancy and collinearity, a requirement that cannot be satisfied by any fixed or generic library in the absence of domain knowledge. Symbolic regression addresses the li-brary problem directly, but this flexibility comes at a steep price: the combinatorial nature of expression tree search renders it computationally intensive, highly sensitive to measurement noise, and prone to producing overfitted expressions that are numerically unstable when integrated as differential equations [22, 23]. Moreover, because symbolic regression methods optimize each state variable independently, they struggle to enforce the coupled structure of multi-dimensional dynamical systems [8]. The broader challenge, which is automatically constructing a minimal, physics-appropriate function library from raw data without any prior knowledge of the system’s mathematical form, remains an open and critical problem in scientific machine learning. In this work, we present AutoSINDy , a hybrid Discovery-then-Solve framework designed 4FIG. 1. Conceptual overview of AutoSINDy . Noisy observational data (left) enters a hybrid evolutionary-sparse discovery engine (centre): PySR searches the symbolic space via expression-tree evolution, producing a set of candidate functional forms that is then filtered by SINDy ’s sparse regression. The output (right) is a concise, closed-form governing equation that faithfully reconstructs the underlying physics. 

to directly bridge this gap. The key insight is a structural decomposition of the equation discovery problem: symbolic regression, applied locally to short bootstrapped data subsets, need not solve the complete discovery problem, it needs only surface plausible candidate functional forms efficiently. These candidates are then systematically curated and handed to SINDy for precise, sparse coefficient identification. This separation of structure discov-ery (what functional forms might appear) from sparse selection (which terms are active and with what coefficients) allows each component to operate in the regime where it excels. 

AutoSINDy thus recovers the expressive power of symbolic regression while retaining the interpretability, efficiency, and robustness of SINDy , without requiring any domain knowl-edge about the system’s mathematical form. Figure 1 provides a high-level illustration of this pipeline. The primary contributions of this work are as follows. 1. Automated, assumption-free library generation. We propose a PySR -based discovery engine [22] that operates over bootstrapped data chunks, mining candidate functional forms through evolutionary optimization with no prior specification of the mathematical structure. This directly addresses the library design bottleneck that limits all fixed-library SINDy variants [9, 18]. 2. A principled symbolic curation pipeline. We introduce a three-stage curation 5mechanism that decomposes raw symbolic expressions into atomic basis functions, applies configurable expansion strategies (severe, gentle, or hybrid), and prunes mul-ticollinear features via variance inflation factor (VIF) analysis with a simplicity bias. This pipeline transforms unstructured genetic algorithm output into a clean, non-redundant linear basis amenable to robust sparse regression. 3. Ensemble-based sparse identification with hard-cutoff thresholding. We in-tegrate the curated library with the SINDy suite of optimizers, such as STLSQ or SR3 [16], and a bootstrap ensemble approach with configurable inclusion-probability thresholding, extending the E-SINDy framework [19]. Terms appearing in less than a user-specified fraction of bootstrap models are discarded, providing strong noise rejection without sacrificing interpretability. 4. Systematic benchmarking against strong baselines. We evaluate AutoSINDy 

on canonical nonlinear systems spanning oscillatory, limit-cycle, and chaotic regimes under varying noise levels, comparing against standard SINDy with enriched polynomial-Fourier libraries and standalone symbolic regression. AutoSINDy consistently recov-ers ground-truth governing equations, achieving higher predictive accuracy, superior generalization to unseen trajectories, and substantially lower symbolic complexity than either baseline. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews related work on sparse identification, symbolic regression, and hybrid equation discovery methods. Sec-tion III presents the AutoSINDy framework in detail. Section IV describes the experi-mental setup and evaluation metrics. Section V reports results and comparative analysis. Section VI discusses implications, limitations, and future directions. Section VII concludes.  

> II. RELATED WORK

Data-driven equation discovery lies at the intersection of sparse optimization, evolution-ary computation, and scientific machine learning. We survey the most relevant lines of work, organized by methodology and proximity to the AutoSINDy framework. 6A. Sparse Identification of Nonlinear Dynamics 

The SINDy algorithm [9] established the modern framework for sparse, library-based equation discovery. Given state measurements and their time derivatives, SINDy assem-bles a matrix of candidate nonlinear functions, typically polynomials and trigonometric terms, and recovers the governing equations as the sparse solution to an overdetermined regression problem using STLSQ. The extension PDE-FIND [10] applied this principle to partial differential equations, enabling the recovery of spatiotemporal governing laws such as the Navier-Stokes and Kuramoto-Sivashinsky equations from data. The PySINDy soft-ware package [11, 12] has become the standard implementation platform, providing modular support for library construction, optimizer selection, and integration with automatic differ-entiation tools. Building on this infrastructure, a rich family of SINDy variants has addressed distinct limitations of the original formulation. The SINDy -control extension [13] incorporates ex-ternal control signals, enabling discovery of actuated dynamics from input-output data. Implicit-SINDy [14] extends the framework to rational function nonlinearities through cross-multiplication. Autoencoder-SINDy [15] jointly learns a coordinate transformation into a parsimonious latent space and discovers the sparse governing equations within it. Noise robustness has been a persistent focus. The weak-form SINDy approach [17] refor-mulates the regression problem in an integral form, multiplying both sides by smooth test functions and integrating over time windows, effectively averaging out noise and eliminat-ing the need for direct derivative computation. E-SINDy (Ensemble-SINDy ) [19] takes a complementary statistical approach, applying bagging to SINDy : an ensemble of models is identified from subsets of the data, inclusion probabilities are computed for each can-didate library term, and terms with low inclusion probabilities are thresholded, providing uncertainty quantification and robustness in the low-data, high-noise limit. Model selection has also received sustained attention. SINDy -AIC [18] integrates the AIC into the SINDy pipeline, ranking candidate models by their balance of goodness-of-fit and parametric complexity. The variant of Dong et al. [24] further incorporates group sparsity to identify coefficient-dependent PDEs and introduces a formal treatment of noise distribution estimation. SR3 [16] replaces STLSQ with a convex relaxation that decouples coefficient shrinkage and thresholding, improving performance in the presence of highly 7correlated library features. Probabilistic approaches, including sparse Bayesian formulations with spike-and-slab and horseshoe priors [25], provide full posterior distributions over model coefficients at the cost of higher computational burden. Across all of these advances, the fundamental limitation remains unchanged: the quality of the identified model is bounded above by the quality of the user-specified candidate library. This library design problem is the primary motivation for AutoSINDy . 

> B. Symbolic Regression

Symbolic regression (SR) searches the space of all mathematical expressions representable by a given set of operators and variables, simultaneously inferring functional form and param-eters. The foundations of modern SR trace to genetic programming, pioneered by Koza [20], which represents mathematical expressions as trees and applies evolutionary operators to iteratively improve a population of candidate expressions. The landmark Eureqa platform of Schmidt and Lipson [21] established SR as a practical scientific tool, applying Pareto optimization to jointly minimize prediction error and expression complexity. Among current SR tools, PySR [22] has established itself as the leading open-source library for practical symbolic regression in the sciences. PySR employs a multi-population evolutionary algorithm with an evolve-simplify-optimize loop: populations of expression trees evolve through mutation and crossover, each surviving expression is algebraically simplified via SymPy, and its numerical constants are refined by nonlinear optimization. An adaptive parsimony penalty discourages premature specialization, and a Julia backend (SymbolicRegression.jl) compiles user-defined operators into SIMD kernels at runtime. Arecent systematic benchmark by Brum et al. [23] evaluated different SR methods on nine canonical dynamical systems including the Lorenz attractor, Lotka-Volterra equations, and a suite of epidemiological compartmental models under noisy conditions. PySR was the top-performing method overall, recovering the correct structural form of all nine systems and demonstrating both accuracy and statistical robustness that no other evaluated method matched. Despite this success, SR has inherent limitations when applied to multi-dimensional dy-namical systems. Because SR methods optimize each state variable’s equation indepen-dently, they cannot enforce shared structure across coupled variables or exploit sparsity [8]. 8The NP-hardness of the general SR problem means that practical algorithms are heuristic and do not guarantee convergence to the globally optimal expression. Recovered expressions are often algebraically redundant or numerically ill-conditioned when integrated as ODEs, and tend to be of higher complexity than necessary [23, 26]. These limitations motivate the use of SR as a library generation tool rather than a standalone solver.  

> C. Hybrid and Automated Equation Discovery

Several prior works have sought to combine the strengths of symbolic and sparse re-gression, or to automate the library construction process. Fasel et al. [19] note that SR algorithms are inherently imbued with ensembling ideas, SR populations randomly combine library terms, and the best expressions at each complexity are retained across iterations, suggesting SR and sparse regression as complementary rather than competing approaches. However, no prior work had operationalized this complementarity into a formal hybrid dis-covery pipeline. HAVOK (Hankel Alternative View Of Koopman) [27] and its successors combine de-lay embedding with sparse regression to discover linear representations of chaotic systems in lifted coordinates, effectively automating a restricted form of basis generation. Autoencoder-

SINDy [15] jointly learns nonlinear coordinate transformations and sparse governing equa-tions, automating basis discovery for systems with unknown intrinsic coordinates. Neural ODE– SINDy hybrids [28] use neural networks to parameterize unknown dynamics while 

SINDy identifies the interpretable sparse structure, an approach effective when partial do-main knowledge is available. In the biological modeling context reviewed by Métayer et al. [8], hybrid and modular frameworks combining mechanistic grounding with data-driven library construction are identified as the primary direction for next-generation digital twin discovery. A critical distinction between these prior works and AutoSINDy is the treatment of the library as a fully learned, data-driven object with no domain-knowledge assumptions. Existing hybrid methods either require labeled intrinsic coordinates, known partial structure, or combine SR and sparse regression only conceptually without a formal curation pipeline. 

AutoSINDy is the first framework to use symbolic regression purely as an unsupervised basis mining tool, to systematically decompose and filter its output through collinearity 9analysis, and to hand the resulting library to SINDy for sparse coefficient recovery, all without any prior knowledge of the system’s mathematical form.  

> D. Deep Learning and Neural Approaches

Neural network-based approaches have also been applied to equation discovery and dynamical system identification. Physics-Informed Neural Networks (PINNs) [29] embed known PDEs into the loss function of a neural network, enabling data-efficient regression for parameterized systems with known governing structure. Neural ODEs [30] parameter-ize continuous-time dynamics as neural networks, enabling flexible modeling of black-box dynamical systems but at the cost of interpretability. Transformer-based SR models such as ODEFormer [31] uses a transformer pretrained on millions of synthetic trajectories to directly predict the symbolic form of a governing equation from data. It achieves strong results on low-dimensional benchmark systems but requires enormous pretraining and does not generalize reliably outside its training distribution. In contrast, AutoSINDy requires no pretraining, produces human-readable closed-form equations, and operates from scratch on any system for which time-series data can be collected.    

> III. THE AUTOSINDY FRAMEWORK

AutoSINDy is a three-stage, fully automated pipeline that converts raw, noisy time-series observations into a sparse, interpretable set of governing differential equations, without any prior specification of the system’s mathematical form. Figure 1 sketches the high-level concept: noisy observations feed a hybrid system in which a genetic algorithm (PySR) and a sparse regressor (SINDy) operate in sequence rather than in competition. Figure 2 gives a visual overview of the pipeline. In Stage 1 ( Discover ), symbolic regression is applied to small, randomly sampled data windows to mine a diverse pool of candidate functional forms. In Stage 2 ( Curate ), that raw pool is systematically decomposed, expanded, and filtered by a collinearity-aware pruning procedure that produces a compact, well-conditioned library. In Stage 3 ( Identify ), the curated library is handed to SINDy equipped with a bootstrap ensemble optimizer, which identifies the final sparse governing equations. Each stage is described in full below. 10 Mines diverse mathematical forms from local data windows. Transforms messy strings into a clean, non-redundant basis library. Fits coefficients using sparse regression keeping stable physics. Bootstrap Aggregating Filtering by P(Inclusion) > FIG. 2. The AutoSINDy hybrid architecture for robust automated discovery of governing equations. 

Step 1 Discover: PySR is applied independently to multiple short, randomly sampled data chunks, producing a pool of raw symbolic expressions (e.g., sin( x) + x2, 0.5y exp( −x), cos( y)). 

Step 2 Curate: Each expression is symbolically decomposed into atomic sub-terms ( sin( x) + y2 →

sin( x), y 2), the atoms are sorted by complexity to enforce a simplicity bias, and collinear terms (e.g., 

cos( x)y, which is nearly linearly dependent on already-kept terms) are rejected by a VIF/correlation redundancy filter. The result is a compact, stable custom library Θ(x). Step 3 Identify: An Ensemble-SINDy optimizer fits sparse coefficients ξ across B bootstrap replicates; a hard-cutoff inclusion filter then retains only terms whose inclusion probability exceeds κ = 0 .80 , yielding a concise governing equation. 

11 A. Problem Formulation 

We seek to identify the governing ordinary differential equations of an n-dimensional dynamical system 

˙x(t) = f (x(t)) , x(0) = x0, (1) where x(t) ∈ Rn is the state vector and f : Rn → Rn is an unknown, potentially nonlinear vector field. We observe m snapshots 

X = x(t1), . . . , x(tm)⊤ ∈ Rm×n (2) corrupted by additive Gaussian noise of relative amplitude σ (measured as a fraction of the per-dimension standard deviation of the clean trajectory). Time derivatives ˙X are estimated using PySINDy’s SmoothedFiniteDifference operator [11, 12], which applies a Savitzky-Golay smoothing filter before finite differencing to suppress noise amplification in the derivative estimate. The objective is to recover f as a sparse, closed-form symbolic expression. Following the 

SINDy formulation [9], this amounts to identifying a sparse coefficient matrix Ξ ∈ Rp×n

such that 

˙X ≈ Θ(X) Ξ, (3) where Θ(X) ∈ Rm×p is a library matrix whose p columns are candidate functions eval-uated over all observed states. Rather than specifying Θ from prior domain knowledge, 

AutoSINDy constructs it automatically from data through the three stages described be-low.    

> B. Stage 1: Symbolic Mining via PySR (Discover )

The first stage uses PySR [22], a state-of-the-art multi-population evolutionary sym-bolic regression tool, to extract a diverse pool of candidate functional forms directly from trajectory data. Two design choices, chunked stochastic sampling and full Pareto harvest-ing, ensure that the discovery phase is both computationally tractable and semantically comprehensive. 12 1. Chunked Stochastic Sampling 

Rather than applying symbolic regression to the full training trajectory, AutoSINDy 

operates on K short, randomly sampled windows of the data. Each chunk is constructed by drawing, without replacement, an index set Ik of size c = ⌊mtrain /d ⌋ from the training samples: 

Dk = (xi, ˙xi) : i ∈ I k , k = 1 , . . . , K, (4) where d is the chunk-size divisor and K is the number of discovery rounds. This strategy serves three purposes simultaneously: (i) each compact window exposes a concentrated local slice of state space, making the evolutionary search substantially more tractable than fitting the full trajectory; (ii) different windows sample different dynamical regimes, generating a semantically diverse candidate pool; and (iii) the random selection prevents systematic over-representation of any single region of the attractor, improving the breadth of functional forms discovered.  

> 2. Symbolic Regression and Pareto Harvesting

For each chunk Dk and each target derivative ˙xj , AutoSINDy invokes PySR with a fixed operator vocabulary comprising the binary operators and the unary operators. Nested trigonometric compositions (e.g. sin(sin( ·)) ) are explicitly forbidden via nested constraints, preventing the evolutionary search from exploiting degenerate identities. These constraints are applied to ensure the search space remains consistent with traditional methods, thereby facilitating a more practical comparison. Crucially, AutoSINDy harvests every expression that appears on the returned Pareto-optimal front, not only the single highest-scoring model. Sub-optimal expressions at lower complexity levels frequently contain structurally correct atomic sub-terms that are globally valid for the governing equation, even when the full expression is a poor fit to a particular local chunk. The union of all Pareto expressions across all chunks and all target variables defines the raw symbolic pool: 

Eraw =

> n

[

> j=1
> K

[

> k=1

[

> c

ej,k,c , (5) where ej,k,c denotes the Pareto expression of complexity c obtained for target j on chunk k.13 All expressions are stored as SymPy [32] symbolic objects for symbolic manipulation in the subsequent curation stage.  

> C. Stage 2: Multi-Stage Library Curation ( Curate )

The raw pool Eraw typically contains hundreds of compound, overlapping symbolic ex-pressions. Using them directly as library columns would produce a severely rank-deficient library matrix and destabilize the sparse regression. Stage 2 reduces this pool to a com-pact, well-conditioned set of basis functions through three sequential operations: symbolic decomposition, algebraic expansion, and collinearity pruning. The full procedure is given in Algorithm 1.  

> 1. Step 2a: Symbolic Decomposition

Each expression e ∈ E raw is parsed via SymPy and decomposed into its additive sub-terms (atoms): 

Ae = a : a is an additive atom of e . (6) For example, the expression 3x20 + 2 sin( x1) yields atoms {x20, sin( x1)}. All numeric con-stant prefactors are stripped, since SINDy learns all coefficients independently during the regression step. The full atomic set is formed by A = S 

> e∈E raw

Ae, de-duplicated by symbolic equivalence. This step focuses the library on unique functional forms rather than rescaled variants of the same expression.  

> 2. Step 2b: Algebraic Expansion

Compound atomic terms may contain grouped polynomial sub-expressions whose mono-mials are useful basis functions in their own right. AutoSINDy supports three configurable expansion strategies applied to each atom via SymPy’s algebraic and trigonometric expan-sion routines: 

• Severe: Full polynomial and trigonometric expansion. (x0+x1)2 becomes {x20, 2x0x1, x 21}

and sin( x0 + x1) is expanded via the angle-sum identity. This maximizes coverage of monomial basis functions at the cost of a larger intermediate pool. 14 • Gentle: Only constant-factor expansion; grouped polynomial expressions are pre-served intact. (x0 + x1)2 remains as a single atom. This is the default strategy and performs best on systems where the true basis functions are grouped. 

• Hybrid: Both the gentle and severe forms of each atom are added to the pool, pro-viding maximum coverage at the cost of a temporarily larger candidate set before pruning. After expansion, all atoms are collected into the augmented candidate set A = {a1, . . . , a P }

and sorted in ascending order of SymPy operator count . This complexity ordering enforces a simplicity bias : simpler expressions are always considered before more complex ones in the subsequent pruning step, ensuring that when two expressions carry equivalent empirical information, the algebraically simpler one is preferred.  

> 3. Step 2c: Collinearity Pruning with Simplicity Bias

Multicollinearity among library terms is the primary driver of coefficient instability in sparse regression: near-linearly dependent columns inflate coefficient variance and frustrate the sparsity optimizer. AutoSINDy removes such redundancy through a greedy forward-selection procedure that processes the complexity-sorted candidates in order. Let L = ∅ be the accepted library, initially empty. For each candidate atom ai ∈ A (in complexity order): 1. Evaluate vi = ai(Xtrain ) ∈ Rmtrain .2. Discard ai if std( vi) < ε (constant or numerically degenerate over the training domain). 3. Otherwise, compute the pairwise Pearson correlation between vi and every already-accepted feature vj = aj (Xtrain ), aj ∈ L . Accept ai if and only if 

corr  vi, vj

 < ρ max ∀ aj ∈ L , (7) where ρmax is the collinearity threshold. 4. If accepted, append ai to L.15 The complexity-ordered traversal guarantees the simplicity bias: a complex atom ai is re-tained only if it provides information that no simpler already-accepted term can replicate. This directly implements Occam’s razor at the library level, independently of the down-stream sparse optimizer. An alternative pruning criterion based on the Variance Inflation Factor (VIF) is also supported. In this mode, a temporary ordinary least squares regression is fitted with ai as the response and all columns of L as predictors; the resulting R2 

> i

yields 

VIF i = 11 − R2

> i

. (8) The atom ai is accepted if and only if VIF i < τ VIF . The VIF criterion detects multicollinear-ity with respect to the entire accepted set rather than any single pair, making it more sensitive to jointly redundant groups of terms. In our experiments, pairwise correlation pruning was used as the primary method due to its lower computational overhead and competitive results; VIF pruning is retained as a configurable option. The final curated library L = {ℓ1, . . . , ℓ q}, with q ≤ P , is used to construct the library matrix Θ(X).16 Algorithm 1: Library Curation with Simplicity Bias 

Input: Raw pool Eraw , training data Xtrain , threshold ρmax , expansion strategy 

s ∈ { gentle , severe , hybrid }

Output: Curated library LA ← ∅ ;

for e ∈ E raw do 

Parse e with SymPy; decompose into additive atoms; strip numeric constants; Apply expansion strategy s to each atom; 

A ← A ∪ { expanded atoms };

end 

Sort A by SymPy operator count (ascending); 

L ← ∅ ;

for ai ∈ A (in sorted order) do 

vi ← ai(Xtrain );

if std( vi) < ε then skip (constant or degenerate); 

if max aj ∈L corr( vi, vj ) < ρ max then 

L ← L ∪ { ai};

end end return L

D. Stage 3: Sparse Identification via Ensemble SINDy (Identify )

1. Library Matrix Construction 

The curated library L = {ℓ1, . . . , ℓ q} is augmented with a constant bias term to form a library of p = q + 1 functions. The library matrix evaluated over the training data is 

Θ(Xtrain ) = 1, ℓ 1(Xtrain ), . . . , ℓ q(Xtrain ) ∈ Rmtrain ×(q+1) , (9) where each column is the function evaluated point-wise over all training observations. 17 2. Sparse Regression via STLSQ or SR3 

The sparse coefficient matrix ˆΞ is obtained by solving the ℓ0-penalized regression problem 

ˆΞ = arg min 

> Ξ

˙Xtrain − Θ(Xtrain )Ξ 2 

> F

+ λ∥Ξ∥0, (10) where ∥ · ∥ F is the Frobenius norm. Two sparse optimizers are supported. Sequential Thresholded Least Squares (STLSQ) [9] is the default: it alternates between a ridge-regularized least-squares fit and a hard coefficient threshold at level λ until the active set converges. The threshold λ

acts as the principal sparsity-promoting hyperparameter. Alternatively, Sparse Relaxed Regularized Regression (SR3) [16] reformulates the problem with a convex relaxation that introduces an auxiliary variable, decoupling the fitting and thresholding sub-problems. SR3 is particularly effective when library columns have moderate correlations that survive the curation step; it is accessible as a configurable option with relaxation parameter ν and a fixed maximum iterations.  

> 3. Bootstrap Ensemble with Inclusion-Probability Masking

To suppress library terms that are selected spuriously due to noise, AutoSINDy wraps the chosen optimizer inside a bootstrap ensemble following the E-SINDy paradigm [19]. A total of B bootstrap replicates are drawn from the training set, and an independent sparse model is fitted on each replicate. The empirical inclusion probability of the (i, j )-th coefficient (library term i, state variable j) is 

ˆpij = 1

B

> B

X

> b=1

1|Ξ(b) 

> ij

| > 0. (11) A hard-cutoff mask then enforces a binary active/inactive decision: 

ˆΞij =



¯Ξij if ˆpij ≥ κ, 

0 otherwise, (12) where ¯Ξij is the ensemble mean coefficient computed over replicates in which the term was active, and κ is the inclusion cutoff. Terms appearing in fewer than κ% of bootstrap fits are deemed noise artifacts and set to zero, yielding maximally sparse and physically 18 interpretable final equations. The combination of a curated, low-redundancy library and ensemble-based term filtering provides two complementary layers of noise rejection: the curation stage eliminates structurally redundant candidates before fitting begins, while the inclusion filter eliminates statistically unreliable coefficients after fitting.  

> 4. Unified vs. Per-Variable Library Strategies

AutoSINDy supports two strategies for library construction and fitting, offering a trade-off between cross-equation consistency and per-equation specificity. 

a. Separate libraries (default). For each target derivative ˙xj , Stage 1 runs PySR in-dependently and Stage 2 curates a variable-specific library Lj . A separate SINDy model is then fitted for each j, solving ˙xj ≈ Θj (X) ξj . This strategy allows each equation to contain only the functional forms that are locally relevant, and typically produces the most parsimonious individual equations. 

b. Unified library. Alternatively, Stage 1 harvests expressions for all target variables simultaneously; Stage 2 pools and curates them into a single shared library L; and a single 

SINDy model is fitted across all state variables jointly via Eq. (3). The unified strategy is better suited to tightly coupled systems where the same functional forms appear in multiple equations, as it enforces structural consistency at the cost of including terms that may be irrelevant for some equations. In our experiments, the separate-library strategy is used as the default because it produces consistently lower complexity and more accurate identification across the benchmark suite.  

> E. Complete Pipeline Summary

The full AutoSINDy procedure is summarized in Algorithm 2. 19 Algorithm 2: AutoSINDy : Automated Sparse System Identification 

Input: Noisy observations X, estimated derivatives ˙X, hyperparameters 

K, d, ρ max , λ, B, κ 

Output: Sparse symbolic model ˆΞ and governing equations ˆf

// Stage 1: Symbolic Discovery 

Eraw ← ∅ ;

for k = 1 , . . . , K do 

Sample random chunk Dk of size ⌊mtrain /d ⌋;

for j = 1 , . . . , n do 

Run PySR on (Dk, ˙xj ); harvest full Pareto front Pjk ;

Eraw ← E raw ∪ P jk ;

end end 

// Stage 2: Library Curation (Algorithm 1) 

L ← Curate (Eraw , Xtrain , ρ max );Build library matrix Θ(Xtrain ) from L ∪ { 1};

// Stage 3: Ensemble Sparse Identification 

for b = 1 , . . . , B do 

Draw bootstrap replicate; fit sparse optimizer → Ξ(b);

end 

Compute ˆpij via Eq. (11); Apply hard-cutoff mask via Eq. (12) to obtain ˆΞ;

return ˆΞ,; 

ˆf(x) = Θ(x) ˆΞ 

> IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP

Evaluating a symbolic discovery framework requires more than measuring predictive ac-curacy on training data: a method that memorizes the training trajectory adds no scientific value, and a method that produces interpretable equations which immediately diverge un-der integration is not physically meaningful. Our experimental design therefore makes two deliberate choices. First, all generalization metrics are computed on a completely unseen 

20 validation trajectory generated from a different initial condition with zero noise, ensuring that reported scores reflect the ability to capture true governing physics rather than noise-specific patterns. Second, we evaluate both derivative prediction (a local, instantaneous test of structural correctness) and long-horizon simulation (a global, integral test of dynamical stability), since the two can diverge dramatically: an equation may fit local derivatives well yet diverge catastrophically under forward integration. The full experimental protocol is described below. 

A. Benchmark Dynamical Systems 

We evaluate AutoSINDy on six canonical nonlinear dynamical systems spanning a wide range of structural complexity and dynamic character (Table I). The true canonical com-plexity, measured as the total symbolic operator count of the fully expanded governing equations, ranges from 3 for the simple harmonic oscillator to 15 for the Complex Lorenz system, which couples chaotic dynamics with a transcendental cross-term γx 1 sin( x0 + x2).

TABLE I. Benchmark dynamical systems, governing equations, key dynamical characteristics, and ground-truth canonical complexity (SymPy operator count of the expanded form).                                                                              

> System nGoverning Equations Characteristics True Complexity
> Harmonic Oscillator 2˙x0=x1
> ˙x1=−k1x0−k2x1
> Linear, periodic 3Damped Pendulum 2˙x0=x1
> ˙x1=−bx 1−csin( x0)Trigonometric, dissipative 4Modulated Oscillator 2˙x0=x1
> ˙x1=−bx 1cos( x0)−kx 0
> Trigonometric damping 5Van der Pol 2˙x0=x1
> ˙x1=μ(1 −x20)x1−x0
> Nonlinear limit cycle 6Duffing Oscillator 2˙x0=x1
> ˙x1=−δx 1−αx 0−βx 30
> Bistable, polynomial 6Complex Lorenz 3
> ˙x0=σ(x1−x0)˙x1=x0(ρ−x2)−x1
> ˙x2=x0x1−βx 2+γx 1sin( x0+x2)
> Chaotic, trigonometric 15

21 B. Data Generation and Noise Protocol 

Figure 3 illustrates the complete data generation and evaluation pipeline. For each system, a training trajectory of 5000 uniformly spaced snapshots is simulated via SciPy’s 

solve_ivp . Additive Gaussian noise is injected relative to each state variable’s standard deviation: 

Xnoisy = Xclean + ε, εij ∼ N  0, σ 2Var( X·j ), (13) at six levels σ ∈ { 0, 0.01 , 0.02 , 0.03 , 0.04 , 0.05 } representing the noise-to-signal ratio. Each level is repeated across five independent random seeds ( s ∈ { 32 , . . . , 36 }), giving 6 systems ×

6 noise levels × 5 seeds = 180 trials per method, and 540 total runs. Furthermore, A crash-recovery mechanism tracks in-progress runs and automatically applies fallback seeds to any trial that was interrupted, ensuring full sweep completion without duplicating successful runs. The qualitative impact of noise on raw signal fidelity is illustrated in Appendix A, which shows the state trajectories, numerically estimated derivatives, and phase portraits for the damped pendulum at noise levels σ ∈ { 0.00 , 0.01 , 0.05 }. At σ = 0 .05 , the raw derivative signal is heavily corrupted, motivating the need for robust library selection and regularization as implemented in AutoSINDy. The training trajectory is noisy and split 80/20 using a middle split : the central 80% of the time series forms the training set, while the flanking 10% segments form the hold-out test, demanding accuracy in both interpolation and boundary extrapolation. A second, fully independent validation trajectory is generated from the same system with distinct initial conditions and zero measurement noise ( σ = 0 ). This clean trajectory is never exposed to the discovery or fitting stages; it is used exclusively to assess whether the discov-ered model captures the true underlying physics rather than characteristics of the training noise. Simulation performance is assessed by numerically integrating the discovered model forward in time from the validation trajectory’s initial condition and comparing against the corresponding clean ground-truth trajectory.  

> C. Baseline Methods

AutoSINDy is benchmarked against two established methods: 22 Menu         

> AUTOSINDy Standard SINDy Standard PySR
> Reconstructed Equation ( )Training Data Phase Portrait Derivatives prediction Simulation performance
> + Noise Synthetic Benchmarks
> (Known Physics )Start End Start End
> Data-Driven Discovery New Test Trajectory
> 0246810 12
> Time (s)

FIG. 3. Experimental protocol and an illustrative example. A trajectory is generated from a system with known physics and then corrupted by Gaussian noise to produce the training set (centre left). Three methods ( AutoSINDy , Standard SINDy , Standard PySR ) independently attempt to recover the governing equations from this noisy data. Discovered models are validated on a clean trajectory from a previously unseen initial condition: once for derivative prediction accuracy and once for long-horizon simulation. The right panel shows a representative single-trial comparison on the harmonic oscillator, where AutoSINDy achieves the best accuracy at a fraction of the complexity of Standard SINDy .

1. Standard SINDy with enriched library : Uses a fixed candidate library combining polynomial terms up to degree 3 and Fourier basis functions with one frequency: 

Fstd = PolyLib( d=3) ⊕ [PolyLib( d=3) × FourierLib( f =1)] . This large, generic library is the standard choice when the system structure is unknown. The identical ensemble STLSQ optimizer ( B = 20 , λ = 0 .21 ) is used to ensure that performance differences reflect library construction rather than the optimizer. 2. Standard PySR : Direct symbolic regression applied to the full training set, using the same operator vocabulary and hyperparameters as the AutoSINDy discovery stage, but without the curation or sparse-identification stages. The best equation on the Pareto front is selected independently for each state derivative. 23 D. Evaluation Metrics 

Model performance is assessed with five complementary criteria that together probe local structural correctness (derivative prediction), global dynamical validity (long-horizon simu-lation), equation recovery (a strict threshold-based proxy for exact identification), symbolic parsimony (operator-level complexity), and computational efficiency (wall-clock timing). Using all five is essential because the criteria can diverge dramatically: a model may achieve high derivative R2 yet diverge catastrophically under integration, or may produce a compact equation that is nonetheless structurally incorrect. No single score is sufficient on its own.  

> 1. Derivative Prediction Accuracy

The coefficient of determination R2 and mean squared error (MSE) between the true time derivatives and the model’s instantaneous predictions are computed on both the held-out test segment of the training trajectory and the independent clean validation trajectory: 

R2 = 1 −

˙X − ˆ˙X 2

> F

˙X − ¯˙X 2

> F

, MSE = 1

N n ˙X − ˆ˙X 2 

> F

. (14) Scores on the validation trajectory are the primary indicator of structural correctness: amodel that has captured the wrong functional form cannot sustain R2 ≈ 1 on a previously unseen, noise-free trajectory generated from a different initial condition, so this score simul-taneously tests both generalization and equation fidelity. Scores on the test segment of the training trajectory serve as a secondary check for overfitting.  

> 2. Equation Recovery Rate

For each system and noise level, we report the fraction of trials (across seeds) in which the discovered model achieves R2 > 0.99 on the clean validation trajectory. This strict binary threshold acts as a conservative proxy for correct structural identification . The threshold is motivated empirically: a model with an incorrect functional form (for example, a polynomial approximation of a sin( ·) term) reliably achieves R2 < 0.98 on the clean validation trajectory, while a model that has recovered the correct governing terms consistently exceeds 0.99. The recovery rate therefore measures the fraction of trials in which the discovery pipeline succeeds in identifying the true physics, rather than merely fitting the training data. 24 3. Long-Horizon Simulation Stability 

The discovered governing equations are numerically integrated forward from the valida-tion trajectory’s initial condition using SciPy’s stiff Radau ODE solver. Simulated trajecto-ries are compared against the corresponding noise-free ground-truth trajectory, with R2 and MSE computed over the state variables. Integration is terminated early if any state variable exceeds 100 × the ground-truth amplitude, which serves as a divergence detection criterion. Trials in which integration crashes (NaN/Inf values or early divergence termination) are recorded as hard failures: they are excluded from the mean R2 and MSE summaries but counted explicitly in the reported failure rate, ensuring that they do not silently inflate mean performance. Simulation R2 therefore captures whether the discovered equation is not only locally accurate in its derivative predictions but also globally stable and physically coherent when used as a predictive model.  

> 4. Symbolic Parsimony

We measure equation complexity as the total operator count of the fully algebraically ex-panded governing equations, computed via SymPy’s count_ops after applying sympy.expand() .Formally, for a discovered equation ˆf with canonical (expanded) form ˜f = expand( ˆf ), we define 

C( ˆf ) = count_ops   ˜f , (15) where count_ops tallies every arithmetic and transcendental operation in the expression tree (additions, multiplications, exponentiations, sin , cos , etc.). 

a. Why not the standard SINDy term count? The conventional complexity metric in sparse identification is the ℓ0 norm of the coefficient vector which is the number of nonzero library terms. This measure assigns equal complexity to x1 and x21x2x3, treating a simple linear variable and a fourth-degree monomial as indistinguishable in cost. Such a met-ric cannot differentiate a genuinely parsimonious physical model from a bloated one that happens to use few, but individually complex, terms. Operator count, by contrast, grows proportionally with the actual arithmetic operations required to evaluate the expression, providing a complexity measure that is directly consistent with the computational, analytic, and interpretability cost of the discovered equation. 25 b. Why expand before counting? PySR naturally returns factored expressions, e.g. 

μ(1 − x20)x1 for the Van der Pol nonlinearity, while SINDy always returns expanded poly-nomial forms, e.g. μx 1 − μx 20x1. Both representations encode exactly the same physics, yet their raw operator counts differ. Measuring complexity on the as-written form would there-fore systematically and unfairly favour PySR over SINDy -based methods with no scientific justification. Applying sympy.expand() before counting places all methods on an identical canonical representation, and the resulting operator count can be directly compared against the known ground-truth complexity of the benchmark systems reported in Table I. 

c. Sign normalization. An expression whose leading term is negative is negated before counting, using SymPy’s could_extract_minus_sign , since −2x0 − 3x1 and 2x0 + 3 x1

represent equally complex models under a sign flip of the coefficient. This prevents the canonical form from artificially inflating complexity for equations whose dominant term happens to be negative.  

> 5. Computational Efficiency

We report wall-clock timing separately for two stages to allow independent interpretation: 1. Discovery time: the total elapsed time for Stage 1 ( PySR across all chunks and state variables), Stage 2 (curation), and Stage 3 (ensemble SINDy fitting). This is the time a practitioner must wait before a governing equation is available. 2. Simulation time: the time required to numerically integrate the discovered governing equations forward over the simulation horizon using the Radau solver. This reflects the practical cost of using the equation for downstream prediction or control, and is directly affected by equation complexity: bloated equations with many terms produce stiffer ODE systems that require finer time-stepping, leading to substantially longer integration times even when two equations nominally achieve similar R2 scores. These two timing quantities capture complementary aspects of computational cost and are not aggregated, since a fast discovery with a complex equation and a slow discovery with a parsimonious equation represent qualitatively different trade-offs. 26 E. Implementation Details 

AutoSINDy is implemented in Python using PySINDy v1.7.5 [11, 12], PySR v1.5.8 [22], and SymPy v1.14.0 [32] for symbolic manipulation. PySR is run in deterministic serial mode (parallelism="serial" , deterministic=True ) to ensure reproducibility. Source code and all experimental configurations are available at https://github.com/mabasiri95/AutoSINDy . 

> V. RESULTS

We organize the results around four core claims: (i) AutoSINDy achieves superior derivative prediction accuracy across systems and noise levels; (ii) it dramatically out-performs baselines in long-horizon simulation stability; (iii) it discovers equations of near-ground-truth complexity while both baselines systematically over- or under-compress; and (iv) these gains are achieved at a modest computational overhead. Figure 3 provides an illustrative example that motivates the full quantitative analysis and answering the follow-ing questions: Does AutoSINDy recover the correct governing structure? Do discovered models remain stable under long-horizon simulation? How parsimonious are the recovered equations? How does noise robustness compare across methods?  

> A. Overall Reliability: Derivative and Simulation Accuracy

Figure 4 provides the clearest macroscopic summary of relative performance. Trials are classified into four tiers based on new-trajectory R2: Excellent ( R2 ≥ 0.99 ), Good ( 0.90 ≤

R2 < 0.99 ), Poor ( 0 ≤ R2 < 0.90 ), and Failed ( R2 < 0). 

a. Derivative prediction. AutoSINDy places 92.8% of all trials in the Excellent tier for derivative prediction on the clean validation trajectory, compared to 58.9% for Standard SINDy and only 28.3% for Standard PySR. Standard SINDy, despite its large fixed library, places 17.2% of trials in the Failed tier which is a consequence of the ill-conditioning induced by the high-dimensional enriched library at elevated noise levels. Standard PySR is unable to achieve excellent accuracy in the majority of cases (61.1% of trials fall below R2 = 0 .99 ), reflecting its susceptibility to noise-driven over-complexity. 

b. Simulation stability. The gap between methods widens dramatically when evalu-ating long-horizon simulation (Fig. 4, bottom bars per method). AutoSINDy achieves 27 0 20 40 60 80 100 

> Proportion of all trials (%)
> AutoSINDy (ours)
> (Derivative)
> AutoSINDy (ours)
> (Simulation)
> Standard SINDy
> (Derivative)
> Standard SINDy
> (Simulation)
> Standard PySR
> (Derivative)
> Standard PySR
> (Simulation)
> 92.8%
> 68.3%
> 58.9%
> 18.9%
> 28.3%
> 8.3%
> 11.1%
> 8.3%
> 32.8%
> 6.1%
> 12.8%
> 21.1%
> 30.0%
> 16.1%
> 21.1%
> 17.2%
> 51.7%
> 8.9%
> 75.0%
> Accuracy Tier
> Excellent (R² ≥ 0.99)
> Good (0.90 ≤ R² < 0.99)
> Poor (0 ≤ R² < 0.90)
> Failed / Diverged (R² < 0)

Overall Reliability: Derivative vs. Simulation Accuracy 

(Aggregated over all systems & noise levels) FIG. 4. Overall reliability of the three methods, aggregated over all six dynamical systems and all six noise levels ( N = 180 trials per method). Horizontal bars show the proportion of trials in each accuracy tier for derivative prediction (top bar per method) and long-horizon simulation (bottom bar per method). AutoSINDy achieves the highest proportion of excellent outcomes in both categories while maintaining the lowest failure rate. 

Excellent simulation performance in 68.3% of all trials, while Standard SINDy and Stan-dard PySR achieve only 18.9% and 8.3% respectively. Most strikingly, Standard SINDy fails 

(diverges) in 51.7% of trials and Standard PySR in 75.0%, underscoring that good derivative prediction alone does not guarantee stable forward integration. AutoSINDy fails in only 21.1% of trials, and, as detailed next, these failures are concentrated in the most challenging systems at the highest noise levels. 

B. Noise Robustness 

Figure 5 shows the distribution of derivative-prediction and simulation R2 scores ag-gregated across all systems and plotted as a function of noise level σ. AutoSINDy ’s derivative-prediction distribution remains tightly concentrated near R2 = 1 for all noise levels, with only a small tail of outlier trials (primarily on the Duffing system at the high-28 ≤ -0.2          

> (Failed)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> R2 Score
> Derivative Prediction R2(New Trajectory)
> Model
> AutoSINDy
> Standard SINDy
> Standard PySR
> 0.0 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
> Noise Level σ
> ≤ -0.2
> (Failed)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> R2 Score
> Long-Horizon Simulation R2

Noise Robustness Distributions Across All Systems 

(Boxplot + Raw Trial Overlay) FIG. 5. Aggregate noise robustness distributions summarizing performance across all six systems. Boxplots are overlaid with raw trial data points. Top: Derivative prediction R2 on the clean val-idation trajectory remains consistently near unity for AutoSINDy (red) across all noise levels. 

Bottom: Long-horizon simulation R2 shows AutoSINDy maintaining high performance at ele-vated noise while Standard SINDy (green) and Standard PySR (blue) exhibit increasing divergence rates. Trials with R2 ≤ − 0.2 (below the red dotted line) are explicitly grouped as “Failed”. Au-toSINDy maintains the tightest, highest distribution; both baselines exhibit widespread failures, increasingly so with noise. 

est noise levels). In contrast, Standard SINDy exhibits a wide variance that grows with noise, and Standard PySR’s simulation performance degrades at σ = 0 .02 . Even at zero noise, the recovery rates reveal important structural differences. Standard SINDy’s 83% and PySR’s 67% confirm that their failure modes are not purely noise-driven, they stem from fundamental library and regularization limitations. As noise grows, AutoSINDy degrades 29 most gracefully, maintaining 90% recovery at σ = 0 .05 compared to 40% (SINDy) and 20% (PySR). Notably, the derivative R2 distribution of AutoSINDy in Figure 5 remains tightly concentrated near 1.0 at all noise levels, which is a qualitatively different behaviour from the wide, heavy-tailed distributions of both baselines. The per-system performance dashboard (Fig. 6) reveals complementary system-specific patterns and the full noise-level breakdown for all six metrics per system. For the harmonic oscillator, all three methods achieve near-perfect derivative prediction during training. How-ever, Standard SINDy experiences a striking validation failure. This counterintuitive result is explained by severe library bloat: the canonical complexity reaches approximately 70 compared to the ground-truth value of 3. The enriched polynomial-Fourier basis contains high-degree cross-terms and trigonometric functions that are individually predictive on the noisy training data but mutually contradictory when fit simultaneously. Under the ensemble optimizer, many of these spurious terms receive nonzero coefficients, producing an internally inconsistent model that fails on the clean validation trajectory. In contrast, AutoSINDy 

recovers the true equations in every trial for this system. This strong performance by AutoSINDy extends to other systems, recovering the true equations in every trial for the modulated oscillator, whereas Standard SINDy again pro-duces heavily over-complex equations (median ≈ 70 ) compared to the ground-truth complex-ity of 6. On the damped pendulum, which requires discovering the non-polynomial sin( x0)

term from noisy data, AutoSINDy achieves 96.7% recovery compared to 46.7% for Stan-dard SINDy and 33.3% for Standard PySR. Standard SINDy also suffers from library bloat here, reaching a high complexity versus the true value of 4, leading to frequent simulation instabilities. For the Van der Pol oscillator, AutoSINDy recovers a concise equation with a median complexity of approximately 12 and achieves perfect simulation stability, again recovering the true equations in every trial. Conversely, Standard SINDy’s complexity explodes to a median of 175 operators against a ground truth of 6, producing unstable simulations in 6 out of 30 trials (see Section V C). Furthermore, Standard PySR achieves 0% recovery on this system despite producing a median R2 = 0 .8, which consistently falls below the R2 >

0.99 threshold. This confirms that pure symbolic regression, without sparsity promotion, consistently fails to isolate the x20x1 term with sufficient coefficient precision. The Duffing oscillator proves to be the most challenging case for all methods. Au-

30 toSINDy achieves 70% recovery, significantly outperforming the 0% for Standard SINDy and 17% for Standard PySR. The bimodal distribution of outcomes, where trials either suc-ceed completely ( R2 ≈ 1) or fail catastrophically, is visible in Figure 6 as a large interquartile range shaded region for AutoSINDy on the Duffing column. While Standard SINDy and Standard PySR fail in 8 and 7 out of 30 trials respectively, AutoSINDy achieves zero simulation failures (see Section V C). Finally, the Complex Lorenz system represents the most structurally challenging case, featuring a 3-dimensional chaotic attractor and a mixed polynomial-trigonometric coupling term. All methods show higher variance here, yet AutoSINDy achieves zero simulation failures and a median complexity of 16, closely matching the ground truth of 15. Standard SINDy attains a marginally higher derivative R2 of 0.992 versus 0.979 for AutoSINDy , but this comes at the cost of 2.4 × the model complexity (see Section V D). Full per-trial trajectory comparisons, state simulations, and phase portraits for all six systems are provided in Appendix B (Figs. 12–17).  

> C. Simulation Failure Analysis

Figure 7 presents the simulation failure analysis. The left heatmap shows hard integration failures (NaN, Inf, or early termination due to the divergence safety brake) per system. The right panel shows the aggregate mean failure rate trend as noise increases. A critical finding from Figure 7 is that AutoSINDy produces zero hard simulation crashes across all 180 trials. Standard SINDy produces hard failures in 4/30 harmonic oscillator trials, 6/30 Van der Pol trials, 8/30 Duffing trials, and 2/30 each for damped pendulum and modulated oscillator. Standard PySR crashes in 5/30 harmonic oscillator, 2/30 damped pendulum, and 7/30 Duffing trials. The right panel of Figure 7 shows the aggregate failure trend with noise. While Au-toSINDy maintains a flat 0% crash rate at all levels, Standard SINDy rises steeply from 

∼3% at σ = 0 .01 to ∼27% at σ = 0 .05 , driven by increasingly bloated and unstable equa-tion structures. Standard PySR rises to roughly 13% before plateauing, reflecting that its failures are more structurally determined than noise-determined. The distinction between hard crashes (Figure 7) and simulation-tier failures (Figure 4) is important: AutoSINDy ’s 21.1% “Failed” ( R2 < 0) simulation tier consists entirely of 31 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> New Traj.  R2

Harmonic Osc. 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

Damped Pendulum 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

Modulated Osc. 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

Van der Pol 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

Duffing Osc. 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

Complex Lorenz 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

3.5 

4.0 

> New Traj. MSE

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.000 

0.005 

0.010 

0.015 

0.020 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.00 

0.25 

0.50 

0.75 

1.00 

1.25 

1.50 

1.75 

2.00 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

2.5 

5.0 

7.5 

10.0 

12.5 

15.0 

17.5 

20.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0

100 

200 

300 

400 

500 

600 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Sim.  R2

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.00 

0.05 

0.10 

0.15 

0.20 

0.25 

0.30 

0.35 

0.40 

> Sim. MSE

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0

1

2

3

4

5

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.000 

0.025 

0.050 

0.075 

0.100 

0.125 

0.150 

0.175 

0.200 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0

2

4

6

8

10 

12 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0.00 

0.25 

0.50 

0.75 

1.00 

1.25 

1.50 

1.75 

2.00 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

120 

140 

160 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

> Complexity

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0

25 

50 

75 

100 

125 

150 

175 

200 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0

20 

40 

60 

80 

100 

120 

140 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0

50 

100 

150 

200 

250 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0

5

10 

15 

20 

25 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

Noise σ

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

> Recovery Rate

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

Noise σ

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

Noise σ

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

Noise σ

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

Noise σ

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 

Noise σ

0.0 

0.2 

0.4 

0.6 

0.8 

1.0 

Per-System Performance Dashboard (median + IQR; Recovery Rate = mean) 

AutoSINDy (ours) Standard SINDy Standard PySR FIG. 6. Per-system performance dashboard. Each column corresponds to one of the six benchmark systems; each row shows one of six metrics as a function of noise level σ: validation-trajectory derivative R2, derivative MSE, simulation R2, simulation MSE, canonical complexity, and equation recovery rate ( R2val ≥ 0.99 ). Solid lines indicate the median; shaded bands denote the interquartile range over five repeated trials. The bold dashed horizontal line in the complexity row indicates the ground-truth complexity of each system. 

cases where the integration completed without crashing but the resulting trajectory was physically incorrect, which is a recoverable failure mode very different from the integration instabilities of the baselines. 32 Harmonic Osc. 

> Damped Pendulum
> Modulated Osc.
> Van der Pol
> Duffing Osc.
> Complex Lorenz

· 4 / 30 5 / 30 

· 2 / 30 2 / 30 

· 2 / 30 ·

· 6 / 30 ·

· 8 / 30 7 / 30 

· · ·      

> All Noise Levels
> AutoSINDy (ours)
> Standard SINDy
> Standard PySR
> 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05
> Noise level σ
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> 30
> 35
> 40
> Mean failure rate (%) across systems
> Aggregate Failure Trend
> AutoSINDy (ours)
> Standard SINDy
> Standard PySR
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> Failure Rate (%)

Simulation Failure Analysis 

(Left: Aggregated failures | Right: Aggregate trend) FIG. 7. Simulation failure analysis. Left: Heatmap of integration failure counts (out of 30 trials) per system and method. AutoSINDy produces zero hard integration crashes across all systems and noise levels; Standard SINDy failures are concentrated on the Duffing oscillator (8/30) and Van der Pol (6/30); Standard PySR failures appear on the Duffing (7/30) and harmonic oscillator (5/30). Right: Mean failure rate trend vs. noise level, aggregated across systems. AutoSINDy 

(red) remains at 0% throughout, while Standard SINDy (green) and Standard PySR (blue) rise sharply. 

D. Model Parsimony 

Figure 8 compares the median canonical complexity of the discovered equations against the ground-truth values (dashed line) for each system. AutoSINDy recovers equations within 1–2 operators of the ground-truth complexity on all six systems. Standard SINDy’s enriched library induces dramatic over-complexity: 22.7 × on Harmonic Oscillator, 14.8 × on Damped Pendulum, 29.2 × on Van der Pol, and 11.8 × on Modulated Oscillator. The Van der Pol case is particularly striking: the true equation requires only 6 operations, but Standard SINDy discovers equations with a median of 175 operations, showing that while fitting the training data well, is far too complex to simulate stably and carries no interpretable physical 33 Harmonic Osc.     

> Damped Pendulum
> Modulated Osc.
> Van der Pol
> Duffing Osc.
> Complex Lorenz
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100
> 120
> 140
> 160
> 180
> Canonical complexity (operator count)
> GT=3 GT=4 GT=5 GT=6 GT=6
> GT=15
> Model Complexity — Median across all noise levels & trials
> ── dashed line = ground-truth equation complexity
> AutoSINDy (ours)
> Standard SINDy
> Standard PySR

FIG. 8. Model complexity (median canonical operator count across all noise levels and trials). Dashed lines mark the ground-truth complexity of each system. AutoSINDy (red) recovers near-ground-truth complexity on every system. Standard SINDy (green) is severely over-complex due to its large fixed polynomial-Fourier library. Standard PySR (blue) is often under-complex, indicating that standalone symbolic regression compresses equations at the cost of accuracy. 

meaning. Standard PySR, by contrast, tends to under-compress (selecting low-complexity expressions from the Pareto front) at the cost of missing critical terms, which explains its superior parsimony scores alongside its poor simulation stability. The error-vs.-complexity scatter plots (Figs. 9) confirm this picture across all systems simultaneously. AutoSINDy ’s trials cluster in the lower-left region of both plots, which means low complexity and low error, while Standard SINDy’s trials span a wide range of high complexities with no corresponding accuracy benefit, and Standard PySR’s trials show low complexity but substantially higher error. 

E. Computational Efficiency 

Figure 10 shows wall-clock discovery and simulation times as boxplots per system. Au-toSINDy and Standard PySR incur comparable discovery overheads ( ∼20–40 s, median 

∼24 s and ∼20 s respectively) reflecting that both invoke the same PySR engine. Standard SINDy requires under 1 s for library fitting. The discovery overhead of AutoSINDy is 34 1 10 100          

> Canonical complexity (operator count)
> 10 −6
> 10 −4
> 10 −2
> 10 0
> 10 2
> 10 4
> New-trajectory MSE (log scale)
> Derivative Error vs. Complexity
> 110 100
> Canonical complexity (operator count)
> 10 −7
> 10 −5
> 10 −3
> 10 −1
> 10 1
> 10 3
> Simulation MSE (log scale)
> Simulation Error vs. Complexity
> Discovery Models
> AutoSINDy (ours) Standard SINDy Standard PySR
> Dynamical Systems
> Harmonic Osc. Damped Pendulum Modulated Osc. Van der Pol Duffing Osc. Complex Lorenz

FIG. 9. Scatter plots comparing canonical model complexity against prediction error (Derivative MSE and Simulation MSE) on a logarithmic scale. Both panels use shared color encodings for the discovery algorithms and distinct marker shapes for the underlying dynamical systems. Solid markers with error bars denote the median performance and interquartile ranges, while faded back-ground markers represent individual trial runs. AutoSINDy consistently occupies the lower-left region, combining low complexity with low error. 

therefore the cost of automation: it replaces the manual feature-engineering step with a systematic search. Importantly, AutoSINDy is consistently the fastest method for simulation across all systems, with a tight distribution concentrated below 2 s (median ∼1.2 s). Standard SINDy’s simulation time is highly variable, including outliers exceeding 10 2 s, driven by numerically stiff ODE systems arising from its bloated coefficient structures. Standard PySR shows the highest and most variable simulation times ( ∼5–20 s, with extreme outliers), consistent with complex expression trees and frequent near-divergent trajectories that require small integrator steps. The compact equations recovered by AutoSINDy therefore provide a compounding ad-35 10 0 10 1    

> Discovery time (s)
> Harmonic Osc.
> Damped Pendulum
> Modulated Osc.
> Van der Pol
> Duffing Osc.
> Complex Lorenz
> 10 010 110 2
> Simulation time (s)
> Computation Time Distributions (Box Plot / Log Scale)
> AutoSINDy Standard SINDy Standard PySR

FIG. 10. Computation time distributions for discovery (left) and simulation (right). Both axes use logarithmic scale. AutoSINDy ’s discovery time ( 10 –30 s) is comparable to or slightly higher than standalone Standard PySR, and roughly 10 –30 × longer than Standard SINDy, which does not require symbolic search. Simulation times for AutoSINDy are uniformly short and low-variance due to the compactness of the discovered equations; Standard SINDy and Standard PySR exhibit higher and more variable simulation times. 

vantage: they are not only more interpretable but also substantially cheaper to simulate, which is a property of direct practical value in real-time or embedded applications. 

F. Summary of Quantitative Results 

Table II presents a comprehensive performance breakdown of AutoSINDy compared to standard baseline methods across six canonical dynamical systems. To evaluate robustness against observational noise and varying initial conditions, we report the median metrics (and mean Recovery Rate) aggregated across all noise levels and random seeds. The evaluation encompasses structural discovery accuracy (Derivative R2 and MSE), long-term integration 36 stability (Simulation R2 and MSE), model parsimony (Canonical Complexity), and the overall equation Recovery Rate. As demonstrated in Table II, AutoSINDy consistently outperforms the baselines, main-taining near-perfect predictive accuracy (Derivative R2 ≈ 1.0) and stable forward simulation (Simulation R2 ≈ 1.0) across the majority of the evaluated systems. Furthermore, Au-toSINDy successfully avoids equation bloat, consistently discovering parsimonious models whose canonical complexity perfectly or closely matches the ground truth. In contrast, Standard SINDy frequently suffers from catastrophic simulation divergence (evidenced by severely negative Simulation R2 scores and inflated Simulation MSE), even in cases where it achieves reasonable derivative approximations. Meanwhile, Standard PySR struggles significantly with both forward simulation stability and structural recovery, often yielding low recovery rates. These results underscore the efficacy of AutoSINDy’s hybrid discovery-then-solve framework in identifying equations that are not only structurally accu-rate but also dynamically stable over long time horizons.     

> VI. DISCUSSION A. Why AutoSINDy Outperforms Its Components in Isolation

The performance gap between AutoSINDy and its two individual components, PySR 

alone and SINDy alone, is instructive. Standard PySR achieves 28.3% Excellent derivative performance (Figure 4) and collapses to 8.3% in simulation. This discrepancy traces to the lack of regularization: without a sparsity-promoting mechanism, genetic programming optimizes fit on observed training chunks, where even slightly incorrect coefficient values produce models that diverge over long integration horizons. Particularly telling is the 0% recovery on the Van der Pol oscillator: PySR consistently identifies x20x1 as a relevant term, but its estimated coefficient deviates from the true value by a margin that accumulates into trajectory divergence. Standard SINDy suffers from two distinct failure modes depending on the relationship between its fixed library and the true governing structure. The first is over-completeness under noise : the polynomial-Fourier basis contains the correct terms for most systems (e.g., 

x20x1 for Van der Pol, sin( x0) for the damped pendulum), but also hundreds of correlated 37 TABLE II. Aggregated Performance by System. Reported are median values (mean for Recovery %). Bold indicates the best performing model per system. 

System Model Deriv. R2 Sim. R2 Deriv. MSE Sim. MSE Comp. Recov. Harmonic Osc. 

AutoSINDy (ours) 1.000 1.000 2.51e-06 6.93e-06 4.0 100.0% 

Standard SINDy 0.600 0.272 0.136 0.071 68.5 40.0% Standard PySR 0.929 -0.928 0.024 0.191 5.0 16.7% Damped Pendulum 

AutoSINDy (ours) 1.000 1.000 2.58e-04 2.18e-04 5.0 96.7% 

Standard SINDy 0.989 0.622 0.091 0.912 58.5 46.7% Standard PySR 0.891 -0.497 1.117 3.315 6.0 33.3% Modulated Osc. 

AutoSINDy (ours) 1.000 1.000 4.84e-05 5.95e-05 4.0 100.0% 

Standard SINDy 0.997 0.946 5.91e-03 0.030 71.5 93.3% Standard PySR 0.994 0.874 0.013 0.072 6.0 100.0% 

Van der Pol 

AutoSINDy (ours) 1.000 0.999 1.21e-03 1.03e-03 12.0 100.0% 

Standard SINDy 0.997 -0.724 0.019 3.761 176.0 80.0% Standard PySR 0.801 -0.516 2.212 2.991 8.5 0.0% Duffing Osc. 

AutoSINDy (ours) 1.000 0.993 3.25e-06 4.21e-04 7.0 70.0% 

Standard SINDy -64.794 -6.061 8.053 2.136 11.0 0.0% Standard PySR -10.721 -5.884 1.435 1.410 7.0 16.7% Complex Lorenz 

AutoSINDy (ours) 0.994 -0.388 34.905 68.455 17.0 90.0% Standard SINDy 0.994 -0.357 34.644 69.153 35.5 93.3% 

Standard PySR 0.962 -1.982 210.237 163.040 9.0 3.3% 

alternatives. Under noisy derivative estimates, the optimizer distributes coefficients across these spurious terms rather than concentrating them on the few correct ones, producing the catastrophic equation bloat visible in Figure 8: 69 operators for the harmonic oscillator against a ground truth of 3, and 59 for the damped pendulum against a ground truth of 4. The second failure mode is genuine structural incompleteness : the FourierLibrary 

applies sin / cos to individual state variables only, so the compound term x1 sin( x0 +x2) in the Complex Lorenz system is genuinely absent. SINDy approximates it with many polynomial-Fourier cross-products, explaining simultaneously its deceptively high 93% recovery rate and 38 its 39-operator complexity against a ground truth of 15. 

AutoSINDy resolves both failure modes by construction. The Discover stage actively mines for the system-specific functional forms present in the data, including non-standard compound terms such as x1 sin( x0 + x2), rather than assuming they belong to a fixed class. The Curate stage then eliminates over-completeness by pruning the discovered pool to a compact, non-redundant basis before any regression is performed.  

> B. The Critical Role of Library Curation

The curation stage is not merely a preprocessing convenience; it is a necessary condition for well-conditioned sparse regression. Without collinearity pruning, Θ can be near-singular. For example, after PySR discovers both x0 sin( x1) and x0 cos( x1) as candidates, these two features are highly correlated over much of the attractor, and including both destabilizes STLSQ coefficient estimation. By rejecting any candidate whose correlation with already-accepted terms exceeds a threshold, the curation pipeline guarantees that every admitted term carries genuinely independent predictive information. The simplicity bias, which is sorting candidates in ascending order of SymPy operator count before applying the correlation filter, is what makes this pruning meaningful rather than arbitrary. By always admitting the simplest expression that captures a given piece of information, the curation algorithm directly implements a form of Occam’s razor. Com-plex terms are rejected not because they are wrong, but because a simpler term already explains the same variance in the data. Empirically, this produces libraries that are mini-mally sufficient and containing the correct functional forms without redundant decorations. Therefore, the downstream STLSQ optimizer can then concentrate all coefficient mass on the small number of genuinely active terms.  

> C. Simulation Stability as a Test of Physical Validity

The zero hard-crash rate of AutoSINDy across all 180 trials (Figure 7) is a substantive finding rather than a secondary observation. An integration crash, where state variables diverge to infinity within the simulation window, indicates that the discovered model assigns arbitrarily large derivatives to reachable states. This is not merely numerical inaccuracy; 39 it reflects a physically incoherent equation structure in which the right-hand side of the ODE grows without bound. Standard SINDy produces hard crashes in 8/30 Duffing, 6/30 Van der Pol, 4/30 harmonic oscillator, and 2/30 each of damped pendulum and modulated oscillator trials. Standard PySR crashes in 7/30 Duffing and 5/30 harmonic oscillator trials. The aggregate failure trend in Figure 7 (right panel) reveals an important distinction: Standard SINDy’s crash rate increases sharply with noise , reaching ∼27% at σ = 0 .05 , while Standard PySR’s rate stabilizes around 13% and is largely noise-independent. This reflects the different origins of the two failure modes. SINDy crashes are induced by noise inflating the derivative estimates and causing the over-complete optimizer to assign destabilizing coefficients to high-degree terms; this mechanism worsens as noise grows. PySR crashes arise from coefficient imprecision that is structurally determined by the symbolic search rather than by noise level, which is why the rate does not grow systematically with σ.

AutoSINDy ’s consistent avoidance of hard crashes across all 180 trials and all six systems confirms that the discovered equations, whatever their coefficient errors, remain within a plausible physical manifold.  

> D. The Duffing Oscillator: Limits of Noise Robustness

The Duffing oscillator ( ˙x1 = −δx 1 − αx 0 − βx 30) exposes a fundamental boundary of the current framework. Its bistable potential ( α < 0, β > 0) concentrates trajectory density near the two equilibria, where the derivative of x30 is largest and most sensitive to noise. Under moderate noise, all three methods struggle: AutoSINDy achieves 70% recovery (vs. 0% for Standard SINDy and 17% for PySR), but the remaining 30% of trials produce incorrect coefficient signs. The per-system dashboard (Figure 6, Duffing column) shows that AutoSINDy ’s simulation R2 transitions sharply from near-perfect to failed without a gradual intermediate regime, reflecting the binary nature of whether the correct x30 coefficient sign is identified.  

> E. Parsimony, Interpretability, and Downstream Scientific Value

Figure 8 demonstrates that AutoSINDy consistently produces equations within a narrow margin of the true ground-truth complexity. This parsimony is not merely an aesthetic 40 preference; it has concrete practical consequences. Discovered equations at 1.21 × the ground-truth complexity can be directly submitted to downstream scientific analysis. For a dynamical system described by 4 or 6 operators, an analyst can compute equilibria analytically, perform linearization and stability analysis, derive conservation laws, apply perturbation theory, or use the equation as a mechanistic prior in a downstream Bayesian model. None of these operations is tractable on a Van der Pol model with 173 operators or a harmonic oscillator model with 69 operators, even if their derivative prediction scores are nominally acceptable. The timing results (Figure 10) make the same point in computational terms. Au-toSINDy is systematically the fastest method for simulation. This is not because of any algorithmic optimization of the integrator, but because its discovered equations have fewer right-hand-side operations per step, producing less stiff ODE systems that the Radau solver can traverse with larger time steps. Standard SINDy’s bloated equations, by contrast, frequently produce ODE systems whose stiffness requires extremely fine time-stepping, ex-plaining the outliers reaching 10 2 s in Figure 10 (right column) even on two-dimensional systems like the harmonic oscillator. The contrast between derivative R2 and simulation speed therefore captures a key insight that the prediction accuracy on observed states is a necessary but insufficient criterion for equation quality. A concise, physically coherent equation is simultaneously more accurate, more stable, more interpretable, and faster to simulate than a bloated approximation with a comparable short-horizon fit. AutoSINDy demonstrates that these desiderata can be jointly optimized through principled basis construction rather than requiring a post-hoc trade-off.  

> F. Limitations and Future Work

Several limitations of the current framework merit acknowledgment. 

a. Computational cost. AutoSINDy ’s discovery time ( 10 –30 s per state variable) is moderate for two- and three-dimensional systems but scales linearly in the number of state variables and chunks, which could become prohibitive for high-dimensional systems. Promis-ing mitigation strategies include: amortized symbolic regression (pre-training a surrogate to predict candidate terms from data statistics), parallel PySR calls per state variable, and 41 warm-starting from libraries curated on related systems. 

b. Chaotic long-horizon simulation. The Complex Lorenz simulation results confirm that recovering correct governing equations does not guarantee accurate long-horizon sim-ulation for chaotic systems. Chaotic sensitivity means any integration error compounds exponentially; even the true model with finite-precision arithmetic will diverge from a spe-cific reference trajectory. Future evaluation should use attractor-geometry metrics that are insensitive to phase shifts. 

c. Extension to PDEs and real data. All experiments use synthetic ODE data with controlled Gaussian noise. Extension to partial differential equations would require spatially local symbolic regression on data slices, followed by global library curation enforcing spatial consistency. Applying AutoSINDy to real experimental time series, where the ground truth is unknown, data may be irregular, and state variables may be partially observed, remains a high-priority validation direction and a natural next step given the framework’s noise robustness demonstrated here.  

> VII. CONCLUSION

We have presented AutoSINDy , a hybrid discovery-then-solve framework that auto-mates the feature-engineering bottleneck in the sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems. By using PySR -based symbolic regression as an unsupervised basis mining tool, coupling it with a principled collinearity-aware curation pipeline, and feeding the result-ing custom library into SINDy ’s robust sparse optimizers, AutoSINDy recovers correct governing equations from noisy data without requiring any prior specification of the math-ematical form. Benchmarks across canonical nonlinear systems demonstrate consistent ad-vantages in equation accuracy, trajectory generalization, and symbolic parsimony. Unlike the large, black-box coefficient matrices produced by enriched SINDy libraries or the point-estimate expressions of standalone symbolic regression, the compact equations produced by AutoSINDy are immediately usable for mechanistic interpretation, control design, and hypothesis generation. Ultimately, this work establishes a scalable pathway for automated scientific discovery in domains where the governing mathematics is genuinely unknown, including systems biology, neuroscience, climate modeling, and materials science. The com-plete source code, experimental configurations, and benchmark scripts are publicly available 42 at https://github.com/mabasiri95/AutoSINDy .

[1] G. Camps-Valls, A. Gerhardus, U. Ninad, G. Varando, G. Martius, E. Balaguer-Ballester, R. Vinuesa, E. Diaz, L. Zanna, and J. Runge, Discovering causal relations and equations from data (2023), arXiv:2305.13341 [physics.data-an]. [2] H. Wang, T. Fu, Y. Du, W. Gao, K. Huang, Z. Liu, P. Chandak, S. Liu, P. Van Katwyk, A. Deac, A. Anandkumar, K. Bergen, C. P. Gomes, S. Ho, P. Kohli, J. Lasenby, J. Leskovec, T.-Y. Liu, A. Manrai, D. Marks, B. Ramsundar, L. Song, J. Sun, J. Tang, P. Veličković, M. Welling, L. Zhang, C. W. Coley, Y. Bengio, and M. Zitnik, Scientific discovery in the age of artificial intelligence, Nature 620 , 47 (2023). [3] J. N. Kutz, P. Battaglia, M. Brenner, K. Carlberg, A. Hagberg, S. Ho, S. Hoyer, H. Lange, H. Lipson, M. W. Mahoney, F. Noe, M. Welling, L. Zanna, F. Zhu, and S. L. Brunton, Acceler-ating scientific discovery with the common task framework (2025), arXiv:2511.04001 [cs.LG]. [4] J. L. Callaham, S. L. Brunton, and J.-C. Loiseau, On the role of nonlinear correlations in reduced-order modelling, Journal of Fluid Mechanics 938 , A1 (2022). [5] E. P. Alves and F. Fiuza, Data-driven discovery of reduced plasma physics models from fully kinetic simulations, Phys. Rev. Res. 4, 033192 (2022). [6] L. Zanna and T. Bolton, Data-driven equation discovery of ocean mesoscale closures, Geo-physical Research Letters 47 , e2020GL088376 (2020), e2020GL088376 10.1029/2020GL088376, https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/2020GL088376. [7] M. Brenner, F. Hess, J. M. Mikhaeil, L. Bereska, Z. Monfared, P.-C. Kuo, and D. Durste-witz, Tractable dendritic rnns for reconstructing nonlinear dynamical systems (2022), arXiv:2207.02542 [cs.LG]. [8] C. Métayer, A. Ballesta, and J. Martinelli, Data-driven discovery of digital twins in biomedical research, Briefings in Bioinformatics 27 , bbaf722 (2026), https://academic.oup.com/bib/article-pdf/27/1/bbaf722/66846059/bbaf722.pdf. [9] S. L. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, and J. N. Kutz, Discovering governing equations from data by sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 , 3932 (2016), https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1517384113. 

43 [10] S. H. Rudy, S. L. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, and J. N. Kutz, Data-driven dis-covery of partial differential equations, Science Advances 3, e1602614 (2017), https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/sciadv.1602614. [11] B. M. de Silva, K. Champion, M. Quade, J.-C. Loiseau, J. N. Kutz, and S. L. Brunton, Pysindy: A python package for the sparse identification of nonlinear dynamical systems from data, Journal of Open Source Software 5, 2104 (2020). [12] A. A. Kaptanoglu, B. M. de Silva, U. Fasel, K. Kaheman, A. J. Goldschmidt, J. Callaham, C. B. Delahunt, Z. G. Nicolaou, K. Champion, J.-C. Loiseau, J. N. Kutz, and S. L. Brunton, Pysindy: A comprehensive python package for robust sparse system identification, Journal of Open Source Software 7, 3994 (2022). [13] S. L. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, and J. N. Kutz, Sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics with control (SINDYc), IFAC-PapersOnLine 49 , 710 (2016), 10th IFAC Symposium on Nonlinear Control Systems NOLCOS 2016. [14] K. Kaheman, J. N. Kutz, and S. L. Brunton, Sindy-pi: a robust algo-rithm for parallel implicit sparse identification of nonlinear dynamics, Pro-ceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 476 , 20200279 (2020), https://royalsocietypublishing.org/rspa/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rspa.2020.0279/638633/rspa.2020.0279.pdf. [15] K. Champion, B. Lusch, J. N. Kutz, and S. L. Brunton, Data-driven discovery of coordinates and governing equations, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 116 , 22445 (2019), https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1906995116. [16] K. Champion, P. Zheng, A. Y. Aravkin, S. L. Brunton, and J. N. Kutz, A unified sparse op-timization framework to learn parsimonious physics-informed models from data, IEEE Access 

8, 169259 (2020). [17] D. A. Messenger and D. M. Bortz, Weak sindy for partial differential equations, Journal of Computational Physics 443 , 110525 (2021). [18] N. M. Mangan, J. N. Kutz, S. L. Brunton, and J. L. Proctor, Model se-lection for dynamical systems via sparse regression and information criteria, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineer-ing Sciences 473 , 20170009 (2017), https://royalsocietypublishing.org/rspa/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rspa.2017.0009/365284/rspa.2017.0009.pdf. 

44 [19] U. Fasel, J. N. Kutz, B. W. Brunton, and S. L. Brunton, Ensemble-sindy: Ro-bust sparse model discovery in the low-data, high-noise limit, with active learning and control, Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and En-gineering Sciences 478 , 20210904 (2022), https://royalsocietypublishing.org/rspa/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rspa.2021.0904/355985/rspa.2021.0904.pdf. [20] J. R. Koza, Genetic Programming: On the Programming of Computers by Means of Natural Selection (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1992). [21] M. Schmidt and H. Lipson, Distilling free-form natural laws from experimental data, Science 

324 , 81 (2009), https://www.science.org/doi/pdf/10.1126/science.1165893. [22] M. Cranmer, Interpretable machine learning for science with pysr and symbolicregression.jl (2023), arXiv:2305.01582 [astro-ph.IM]. [23] B. R. Brum, L. Lober, I. Previdelli, and F. A. Rodrigues, Discovering equations from data: symbolic regression in dynamical systems, Journal of Physics: Complexity 7, 012001 (2026). [24] X. Dong, Y.-L. Bai, Y. Lu, and M. Fan, An improved sparse identification of nonlinear dy-namics with akaike information criterion and group sparsity, Nonlinear Dynamics 111 , 1485 (2023). [25] S. M. Hirsh, D. A. Barajas-Solano, and J. N. Kutz, Sparsifying priors for bayesian uncertainty quantification in model discovery, Royal Society Open Science 9, 211823 (2022), https://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsos/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsos.211823/994951/rsos.211823.pdf. [26] M. Virgolin and S. P. Pissis, Symbolic regression is np-hard (2022), arXiv:2207.01018 [cs.NE]. [27] S. L. Brunton, B. W. Brunton, J. L. Proctor, E. Kaiser, and J. N. Kutz, Chaos as an inter-mittently forced linear system, Nature Communications 8, 19 (2017). [28] S. H. Rudy, J. Nathan Kutz, and S. L. Brunton, Deep learning of dynamics and signal-noise decomposition with time-stepping constraints, Journal of Computational Physics 396 , 483 (2019). [29] M. Raissi, P. Perdikaris, and G. Karniadakis, Physics-informed neural networks: A deep learn-ing framework for solving forward and inverse problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations, Journal of Computational Physics 378 , 686 (2019). [30] R. T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. K. Duvenaud, Neural ordinary differential equations, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , Vol. 31, edited by S. Bengio, 

45 H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grauman, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (Curran Associates, Inc., 2018). [31] S. d’Ascoli, S. Becker, A. Mathis, P. Schwaller, and N. Kilbertus, Odeformer: Symbolic regres-sion of dynamical systems with transformers (2023), arXiv:2310.05573 [cs.LG]. [32] A. Meurer, C. P. Smith, M. Paprocki, O. Čertík, S. B. Kirpichev, M. Rocklin, A. Kumar, S. Ivanov, J. K. Moore, S. Singh, T. Rathnayake, S. Vig, B. E. Granger, R. P. Muller, F. Bonazzi, H. Gupta, S. Vats, F. Johansson, F. Pedregosa, M. J. Curry, A. R. Terrel, v. Roučka, A. Saboo, I. Fernando, S. Kulal, R. Cimrman, and A. Scopatz, Sympy: symbolic computing in python, PeerJ Computer Science 3, e103 (2017). 

> Appendix A: Effect of Noise on Raw Signal Quality

This appendix supplements Sec. IV B of the main text. Figure 11 illustrates how the noise level σ affects the raw input data available to all methods. The left columns show the state trajectories x1 and x2, which remain visually smooth even at high noise because noise is injected additively on the state. The centre columns show the numerically estimated time derivatives ˙x1 and ˙x2, which serve as the regression targets for all SINDy -based methods and which degrade sharply with noise: at σ = 0 .05 , the derivative signal is almost entirely obscured. The right column shows the corresponding phase-space trajectory; the flow arrows become increasingly erratic as noise grows, reflecting the corrupted derivative estimates. 

> Appendix B: Per-System Identification Results

This appendix supplements Sec. V B of the main text. Figures 12–17 show representative single-trial identification results for each of the six benchmark systems. For each system, we show: (i) derivative fits on the training/test trajectory, (ii) generalization to an unseen trajectory, (iii) state-variable simulation comparison, and (iv) phase portrait. Each figure follows the same layout. The left panels show derivative comparisons on the training/test trajectory which vertical dashed lines mark the training window boundaries (upper left), and an independent out-of-sample unseen trajectory (lower left). The upper right panel shows forward-simulated state variables from a held-out initial condition over time compared against the ground truth. The lower right panel shows the phase portrait comparing the 46 σ = 0.00 

σ = 0.05 

σ = 0.01 FIG. 11. Effect of measurement noise on system observability. State responses ( x, left column), numerical derivative estimates ( ˙x, center column), and phase-space trajectories (right column) for the damped pendulum at three noise levels: σ = 0 .00 (top), σ = 0 .01 (middle), and σ =0.05 (bottom). While the state signals remain interpretable across all noise levels, the derivative estimates degrade rapidly, and the phase portrait becomes densely cluttered. 

predicted dynamics against the true underlying model. AutoSINDy (red dashed), Standard 

SINDy (green dotted), and Standard PySR (blue dash-dot) are compared against the true underlying model (gray solid). 47 FIG. 12. Identification results for the harmonic oscillator ( ˙x0 = x1, ˙x1 = −k1x0 − k2x1) at 

σ = 0 .08 . AutoSINDy recovers the true dynamics and maintains near-perfect concentric-circle phase portrait structure. Standard SINDy fails to generalize to the data beyond the training window boundaries and exhibits trajectory drift due to library bloat (median complexity ≈ 69 ). Also, standard PySR produces a limit-cycle-like divergence in the phase portrait, indicating a missed damping term. 

48 FIG. 13. Identification results for the damped pendulum ( ˙x0 = x1, ˙x1 = −bx 1 − c sin( x0) at σ =0.01 . AutoSINDy correctly recovers the nonlinearity and reproduces the inward-spiralling phase portrait with near-zero simulation error. Standard SINDy retains numerous spurious polynomial– Fourier cross-terms (median complexity ≈ 59 ), degrading simulation fidelity. Standard PySR 

misidentifies the coefficient of the damping term, causing the trajectory not to decay. 

49 FIG. 14. Identification results for the modulated oscillator ( ˙x0 = x1, ˙x1 = −bx 1 cos( x0)−kx 0) at 

σ = 0 .03 . AutoSINDy recovers the damping behavior and produces a stable decaying-oscillation trajectory. Both baselines fail to identify the exact dynamics, resulting in errors in both the derivative comparison beyond the training data and in the phase portrait trajectories. 

50 FIG. 15. Identification results for the Van der Pol oscillator ( ˙x0 = x1, ˙x1 = μ(1 − x20)x1 − x0)at σ = 0 .02 . AutoSINDy recovers the limit-cycle structure and the correct dynamics, yielding a stable phase portrait. Standard SINDy ’s bloated equations (median complexity ≈ 175 ) causing trajectory divergence. Standard PySR consistently misestimates the accurate dynamics, producing different limit cycles. 

51 FIG. 16. Identification results for the Duffing oscillator ( ˙x0 = x1, ˙x1 = −δx 1 − αx 0 − βx 30) at 

σ = 0 .05 . This is the most challenging system for all methods due to the bistable potential and high derivative sensitivity near the equilibria. AutoSINDy recovered the true dynamics and the phase portrait closely matches the true trajectory. 

52 FIG. 17. Identification results for the Complex Lorenz system ( ˙x0 = σ(x1 − x0), ˙x1 = x0(ρ −

x2) − x1, ˙x2 = x0x1 − βx 2 + γx 1 sin( x0 + x2)) at σ = 0 .01 . The three-dimensional state space is visualized via the x0–x1 phase portrait. AutoSINDy closely tracks parts of the true trajectory using a simple discovered equation (median complexity = 16 ). 

53