Title: Perturbative Contrastive Physical Learning

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.09756v1

Published Time: Tue, 09 Jun 2026 02:39:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# Perturbative Contrastive Physical Learning 

Kyungeun Kim, 1, ∗ Amanuel Anteneh, 2 Israel Klich, 2, 3 Olivier Pfister, 2, 4, † and J. M. Schwarz 5, 6, ‡

> 1

Department of Mathematics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC Canada 

> 2

Department of Physics, University of Virginia, 382 McCormick Rd, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA 

> 3

Max Planck Institute for the Physics of Complex Systems, 01187 Dresden, Germany 

> 4

Charles L. Brown Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Virginia, 351 McCormick Road, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA 

> 5

Department of Physics, Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY 13244, USA 

> 6

Indian Creek Farm, Ithaca, NY 14850, USA 

(Dated: June 9, 2026) Responses to perturbations are key to understanding physical systems. The ability to contrast such responses by comparing how a system reacts under slightly different conditions provides a mechanism for learning. Here, we introduce Perturbative Contrastive Physical Learning (PCPL), a general framework in which learning emerges from measurable contrasts between physical states produced by controlled changes to inputs, boundary conditions, parameters, or interpreter func-tions. PCPL unifies and extends prior approaches: Equilibrium Propagation is rooted in contrasts between free and nudged equilibria in energy-based systems, while Frequency Propagation corre-sponds to contrasts extracted from sinusoidally driven, frequency-demodulated responses. We show that contrast-driven updates can reflect either local sensitivities or global inverse-problem structure, yet do not require centralized gradient computation. Instead, effective learning geometry emerges implicitly from the system’s own physical response, allowing learning behavior to arise without an external processor or explicit backpropagation. We demonstrate PCPL in two platforms: (i) spring networks that update bond stiffness using measured displacements and forces, and (ii) continuous-variable photonic circuits trained via x quadrature measurements and finite-difference estimates of the Jacobian. Both platforms successfully learn classification tasks. We further show that a continuous-variable photonic circuit can be trained to implement analog multiplication, illustrating a step toward more autonomous physical learning systems. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Learning requires the ability to modify behavior based on experience. In biology, learning is often as-sociated with brains and centralized neural process-ing [1, 2]. Yet organisms without nervous systems, such as slime molds, are also capable of learning [3]. Moreover, nonliving brain-inspired systems, such as convolutional neural networks, also learn [4]. These observations suggest that learning may emerge from general principles that can be realized directly in physical processes. With this viewpoint, learning arises from measurable changes in system behav-ior produced by controlled perturbations of inputs, boundary conditions, or internal parameters [5–8]. Physical learning, therefore, represents a fundamen-tal shift from brain-inspired learning at the software level to learning that emerges directly from physical processes, with the hardware effectively becoming the software [9]. A key physical principle underlying such learning is the response of a system to perturbations. Phys-   

> ∗kkim@math.ubc.ca
> †opfister@virginia.edu
> ‡jmschw02@syr.edu

ical systems reveal their structure through how ob-servable quantities change when inputs, boundary conditions, or internal parameters are varied. The ability to contrast these responses naturally provides a mechanism for learning. If a system can be per-turbed in a controlled way and the resulting changes in its measurable outputs can be detected, those con-trasts can be used to guide updates to modifiable pa-rameters. Learning then becomes a process of prob-ing, measuring, and remodeling a physical system based on how it responds. Here, we introduce Perturbative Contrastive Physical Learning (PCPL), a general framework that formalizes this principle. In PCPL, parame-ter updates are driven by measurable contrasts be-tween physical states generated by controlled pertur-bations. These perturbations may involve changes to inputs, boundary conditions, internal parameters, or readout mappings, but in all cases learning is de-rived from the difference between two nearby physi-cal responses. The perspective that physical learning can emerge from contrasts between nearby physical states was crystallized by Equilibrium Propagation (EP), which showed that measurable differences be-tween free and weakly nudged equilibria can gen-erate learning signals equivalent to gradient-based optimization [5, 10]. PCPL builds on this insight by 

> arXiv:2606.09756v1 [cs.LG] 8 Jun 2026

2treating contrast itself as the central primitive. And rather than requiring an explicit energy function, equilibrium convergence, or symbolic gradient com-putation, PCPL treats learning as an experimentally accessible operation: apply a perturbation, measure the contrast in observables, and translate that con-trast into a parameter update. This perspective reveals that several existing physical learning schemes can be understood as spe-cial cases of a broader contrast principle. In ad-dition to EP [5, 10], there is Coupled Learning with its experimental realizations [11–15] and Multi-mechanism learning with the contrast encoded in different modalities [16]. Frequency Propagation ex-tracts contrasts from sinusoidally driven, frequency-demodulated responses [17]. In addition, explicit temporal contrasts between free and nudged states using a non-equilibrium memory kernel also make learning possible [18]. PCPL generalizes this idea beyond equilibrium settings and energy-based for-mulations, allowing contrast-driven learning to be implemented in systems with complex dynamics, multiple steady states, or black-box measurement and interpretation layers. By elevating the con-trast itself to the central primitive, PCPL provides a unifying framework for learning across physical sub-strates. These ideas are not limited to classical plat-forms. Recent work has shown that contrast-based learning rules can also be implemented in quan-tum systems, where observables replace classical state variables and measurement outcomes provide the signals needed for adaptation. In particular, quantum generalizations of Equilibrium Propaga-tion demonstrate that contrasts between weakly per-turbed quantum steady states can be used to extract local update signals through measurable expectation values and correlations [19, 20]. From the PCPL per-spective, such schemes represent a specific instance of a broader contrast principle: learning is driven by observable differences between nearby quantum states. Continuous-variable photonic platforms of-fer a natural testbed for this view as Gaussian op-erations, which include quantum squeezing, single-photon gain/loss, interferometric couplings, and ho-modyne detection, enable controlled perturbations and precise readout of system responses—including at the quantum computing level [21–25]. In this way, quantum physical learning appears not as a fundamentally different paradigm, but as a direct extension of contrast-driven adaptation into regimes where information is encoded in quantum states and accessed through measurement. While such quan-tum realizations are an important and rapidly devel-oping direction, the present work focuses on classical mechanical and optical systems, leaving a detailed exploration of quantum platforms to future studies. The organization of the manuscript is as follows. First, we introduce the overall framework, then we apply the framework to a classical spring network followed by several photonic examples. We conclude with a discussion containing a summary and both experimental and theoretical implications.  

> II. PERTURBATIVE CONTRASTIVE PHYSICAL LEARNING: A TWO MODE FRAMEWORK

We begin with a dataset D of paired observations (x, z), where x denotes the set of inputs and z de-notes the corresponding set of outputs. In physical learning systems, z represents a physical readout, such as a desired displacement or stress pattern. A 

batch refers to a finite subset of such pairs sampled from D. The mapping from inputs x to measur-able outputs z may involve an initial physical en-coding, or preprocessing, stage y = F (x) followed by a parameterized physical response G(y, θ) = z.Here, G denotes the observable response of the phys-ical system under modifiable parameters θ to enable learning. Throughout this work, learning acts on the response map G, while F is treated as fixed. This decomposition allows fixed physical architectures to solve more complex tasks through structured input representations rather than architectural expansion. We consider two related learning modes that up-date parameters θ of G, the response of a physical system, from weak nudging perturbations. In both cases, a batch is sampled, features are computed, a parameter update ∆ θ is applied via θ′ = θ + ∆ θ.Note that throughout the paper we denote by δθ asmall imposed probe perturbation used to generate a measurable contrast, and by ∆ θ the parameter update inferred from that contrast. In simple im-plementations these may be proportional, but they play distinct conceptual roles. To determine ∆ θ, the resulting response G(y, θ′) is used to form a con-trast measurement functional M . This functional is task- and implementation-dependent. We will con-sider learning rules based on measurable contrasts between nearby physical responses via observables 

z1 and z2 such that ∆θ ∼ M (z1, z2). (1) In other words, M maps observable contrasts into parameter updates. Specific forms of M will be dis-cussed below. We note that it need not represent an analytically computed gradient; rather, it encodes how physically measurable contrasts can be used for learning. 3 

> FIG. 1. Schematic for PCPL with Mode A (implicit target) and Mode B (explicit target).

The distinction between the two modes is the ref-erence against which the nudged response is com-pared: Mode A contrasts the nudged response against the system’s own free response, while Mode B contrasts it against an externally specified target, often realizable as a physical constraint. Let us now be more specific about the two modes.  

> A. Mode A: Self-referenced contrast: Linear response learning

In Mode A, learning is driven by measurable contrasts between free and weakly perturbed, or nudged, physical responses, enabling parameter up-dates through local response probing. The system is first allowed to relax in a free phase, producing 

zf = G(y, θ), (2) followed by a nudged phase with θ′ = θ+δθ, yielding 

zn = G(y, θ + δθ). (3) For weak nudges, a first-order expansion gives the local parameter-response map 

G(y, θ+δθ) ≈ G(y, θ) + Jθ (y, θ) δθ, Jθ ≡ ∂G ∂θ .

(4) Thus, the contrast between phases is ∆z ≡ zn − zf ≈ Jθ δθ, (5) which is directly accessible as a physical measure-ment. The Mode A learning signal depends on the phase contrast relative to target z∗ via M (zn, zf )|z∗ and is naturally interpretable as a Jacobian-driven update. If M extracts a correlation between internal degrees of freedom and the observed change ∆ z, then the update inherits the structure of linear response the-ory: one probes the system, measures the response, and uses that response to adapt parameters. This self-referential baseline subtraction also reduces bias from offsets or slow drifts in the operating point, making Mode A especially natural for physical sys-tems where free relaxation, such as energy minimiza-tion, is meaningful. Mode A does not require the tar-get to appear directly in the perturbation step. In-stead, the target enters implicitly through the choice of M . Below is the pseudo code for learning us-ing Mode A. Perturbations can be implemented us-ing either one-sided or symmetric nudging. In one-sided nudging, parameters are shifted as θ → θ + δθ ,whereas symmetric nudging applies paired perturba-tions θ ± δθ , enabling a central-difference estimate of the response that reduces bias and improves ac-curacy at the cost of additional measurements. 4

Algorithm 1 Mode A: simple nudging                                                              

> Require: Dataset D; feature map F; system response
> G; contrast measurement functional M; initial pa-rameters θ0; learning rate η; perturbation rule for
> δθ; iterations T
> 1: θ←θ0
> 2: for i= 0 to T−1do
> 3: (x,z)←SampleBatch (D)
> 4: y←F(x)
> 5: Free phase: z f←G(y,θ)
> 6: Nudge: draw small δθand set θ′←θ+δθ
> 7: Nudged phase: z n←G(y,θ′)
> 8: Contrast-to-update: corr ←M(zn,zf)|z∗
> 9: Parameter update: θ←θ+ηcorr
> 10: end for
> 11: return θ

Mode A provides a broader perturbative contrast framework that generalizes several existing physi-cal learning algorithms. In Equilibrium Propaga-tion (EP) [5], learning arises from contrasts be-tween free and weakly nudged equilibrium states in energy-based systems. Coupled Learning simi-larly extracts update signals from measurable differ-ences between nearby physical responses with ex-periments implementing two copies of the system to determine differences[11], while Multi-mechanism learning eliminates the need for two copies by us-ing two types of non-interfering responses, i.e. me-chanical and electrical should they be decoupled [16]. Frequency Propagation considers different frequency domains [17]. Mode A unifies these approaches by treating learning as arising from measurable con-trasts generated by controlled perturbations, in-dependent of whether the underlying system is equilibrium-based, dynamical, classical, or quan-tum. In this view, the central object is not an ex-plicit gradient or energy function, but the experi-mentally accessible response difference that acts as a physically measurable probe of the local response geometry of the system.  

> B. Mode B: Target-referenced contrast: Anchored Learning

Unlike Mode A, which compares nearby responses around the system’s free state, Mode B compares the system’s response to an externally specified target or imposed constraint. Assume we want to modify the weights θ so that the response to a given y is z∗.Linearizing the actual response about θ gives 

G(y, θ + ∆ θ) ≈ G(y, θ) + Jθ ∆θ, (6) 

z∗ ≈ z + Jθ ∆θ. (7) Defining the instantaneous output error e ≡ z∗ − z,the linearized goal e ≈ Jθ ∆θ is posed as a least-squares problem, ∆θ = arg min  

> ∆θ

∥e − Jθ ∆θ∥22 , (8) whose solution is the Moore–Penrose pseudo-inverse, ∆θ ≈ J+ 

> θ

e, (9) or with Tikhonov regularization, ∆θ ≈  JT 

> θ

Jθ + λI −1 JT 

> θ

e. (10) Consequently, Mode B does not merely probe lo-cal sensitivity (as in Mode A), but instead performs a local, metric-aware correction step in parameter space, where the effective metric is given by J⊤ 

> θ

Jθ .Learning therefore follows the natural geometry in-duced by the system’s input–output map rather than the Euclidean geometry of parameter space. Mode B performs target-referenced learning by translating output errors into parameter updates through the local response geometry of the system. Depending on the implementation, these updates may take the form of gradient-descent, Gauss–Newton, pseudoin-verse, or other inverse-geometry corrections. How-ever, in the implementations presented here, the Ja-cobian is measured through controlled perturbations and its pseudoinverse (or a regularized approxima-tion) is computed externally. The key advantage of this metric-aware update is robustness: because (J⊤ 

> θ

Jθ + λI )−1 automatically normalizes the update direction according to the local response geometry, Mode B remains stable across a wide range of learn-ing rates and is insensitive to ill-conditioning of the input space in comparison with gradient descent, for example. Please see Appendix A for more details. Here is the pseudocode for Mode B. 

Algorithm 2 Mode B: direct inverse                                                   

> Require: Dataset D; feature map F; system response
> G; initial parameters θ0; learning rate η; iterations
> T
> 1: θ←θ0
> 2: for i= 0 to T−1do
> 3: (x,z)←SampleBatch (D)
> 4: y←F(x)
> 5: Reference output: z ←G(y,θ)
> 6: Measure J: vary θand evaluate Jθby measur-ing system response z
> 7: Target mismatch: e ←z∗−z
> 8: Parameter update: θ←θ+η J †
> θe
> (e.g. pseudoinverse or other invertible forms)
> 9: end for
> 10: return θ

5While Algorithm 2 presents Mode B in terms of an explicit local inverse, an alternative implementa-tion can be constructed using perturbative contrasts and a measurement functional. In this approach, pa-rameter updates are inferred from correlations be-tween nudged responses and target outputs, allow-ing the effective inverse mapping to emerge from physically measurable quantities without requiring explicit evaluation of the Jacobian or its pseudoin-verse.  

> C. Two Learning Geometries: Sensitivity Probing vs. Local Inversion

Mode A is most directly physical when the free re-sponse zf is a well-defined operating point (or steady state) and nudging corresponds to a small, controlled perturbation: the learning signal is then a bona fide linear response measurement, Eq. (5). Mode B be-comes comparably physical when the target z∗ is not a symbolic label but is embodied as a constraint —a boundary condition, applied force pattern, clamped voltage, imposed concentration field, or geometric confinement. In that regime, the “target” is sim-ply a physical condition the system is required to satisfy, and learning corresponds to remodeling in-ternal parameters so that the constrained configu-ration becomes achievable (or stable) with progres-sively weaker external enforcement. A useful prac-tical hybrid is therefore: employ Mode B to imprint 

or instruct desired behaviors under constraints, then use Mode A to consolidate them by aligning the free dynamics with the nudged behavior via con-trastive, Jacobian-driven refinement. Regarding the measurement functional M , it abstracts the physi-cally accessible measurement used to form a learning signal from pairs of system responses. In Mode A, 

M (zf , zn) extracts information proportional to the phase contrast ∆G ≡ ∆z = zn − zf , (11) which, in the weak-perturbation limit, approximates the Jacobian action Jθ δθ (Eq. 5). In Mode B, 

M (zn, z∗) encodes a local discrepancy between the nudged response (obtained via random perturba-tion or a physics-guided mechanism) and the target, which can be interpreted as an error signal driving a local inverse problem (Eq. 8). While Mode B superficially resembles pseudoinverse-based learning rules used in ma-chine learning, the underlying perspective is different. Conventional inverse methods begin with an explicit computational model and solve an inverse problem within that model. In contrast, Mode B infers the local learning geometry from physically measurable perturbations and response contrasts. In the proof-of-principle implementa-tions presented here, this geometry is represented through an experimentally estimated Jacobian and an externally computed pseudoinverse update. As a result, Mode B can be interpreted as a physically realized pseudoinverse update, where the geometry of the parameter space is encoded in the system’s response to perturbations and read out through contrasts, rather than computed analytically, thereby realizing numerical optimization through physical response measurements. This distinction is crucial: the pseudoinverse update is an abstract linear-algebraic procedure, whereas Mode B im-plements metric-aware learning directly through physically measurable contrasts. Finally, Mode B is conceptually related to target propagation [26]; however, target propagation constructs desired hidden-state targets using approximate inverse mappings, whereas Mode B directly solves a local inverse problem in parameter space using the measured response geometry of the physical system.  

> III. PHYSICAL REALIZATIONS OF PCPL IN MECHANICAL AND PHOTONIC SYSTEMS

We now present two concrete realizations of PCPL: a classical mechanical network and acontinuous-variable photonic circuit. These exam-ples are not intended as domain-specific optimiza-tions, but as conceptual demonstrations of how the same perturbation–contrast principle gives rise to learning across different physical substrates. In particular, we emphasize how both systems natu-rally implement Mode B (target-referenced) learning through pseudoinverse or Gauss–Newton–like geom-etry, while remaining compatible with Mode A–style linear-response probing. See Appendix B for more details on PCPL.  

> A. Spring Networks as Contrastive Learners

The Network. Consider a spring network with modifiable spring constants and equilibrium spring lengths. An illustrative example is shown in Fig. 2. Here, the blue nodes are the input ports, where data-dependent forces are applied, while the green nodes are fixed anchors that impose the boundary condi-tions. The rest of the network relaxes in response to these forces, producing a displacement field that serves as the physical response. The learning objec-tive is to adjust mechanical parameters so that the displacement field describes a desired output given 6an input. The network will be trained to perform classification. We begin with the energy functional: 

E = 12

X

> ij

kij (lij − l(0)  

> ij

)2

= 12

X

> ij

Aij l2 

> ij

+ X

> ij

Bij lij + 12

X

> ij

Cij (12) where Aij = kij , B ij = −kij l(0)  

> ij

, C ij = kij l(0)2  

> ij

.Given this energy functional, two training issues arise. First, to train rest length l(0)  

> ij

and stiffness 

kij , we need to update A, B . Since kij contributes to both A and B, this creates an identifiability prob-lem : multiple combinations of kij and l(0)  

> ij

can pro-duce the same energy, making the optimization ill-conditioned and prone to overfitting.   

> FIG. 2. Spring Network Schematic. The green nodes are fixed and the 4 blue nodes denote where the input forces containing the Iris dataset information are applied.

The second issue concerns gradient evaluation. In a mechanical network, the equilibrium node po-sitions depend implicitly on all spring parameters through force balance, 

∇uE(u, k) = 0 .

Thus, although a partial derivative such as 

∂E ∂k ij 

= 12



lij − l(0) 

> ij

2

appears local, changing kij shifts the equilibrium configuration u∗(k). More generally, for an objec-tive L(u∗(k), k), 

dL

dk ij 

= ∂L

∂k ij 

+ ∂L

∂u · ∂u∗

∂k ij 

,

so exact gradient computation requires the global sensitivity of the relaxed configuration to parame-ter changes. Linearizing the force-balance condition gives 

∂u∗

∂k ij 

= −

 ∂2E∂u2

−1 ∂∂k ij 

(∇uE) ,

which involves the inverse stiffness/Hessian matrix. To remain consistent with the PCPL philosophy and avoid this global adjoint calculation, we instead es-timate parameter sensitivities from measured per-turbative responses and construct updates from the resulting Jacobian. For the proof-of-principle exam-ple considered here, we restrict attention to a small linear spring network, where this Jacobian can be computed efficiently from the output displacements. Given the first identifiability issue, we introduce coordinate vectors ui: setting the rest lengths as fixed to l(0)  

> ij

(ui, uj ) = 1 and add a gravitational force term. Thus, the energy equation becomes: 

E = 12

X

> ij

kij (lij (ui, u j ) − 1) 2 + g X

> k

mkhk(uk)= 12

X

> ij

kij (lij (ui, u j )2 − 2lij (ui, u j ) + 1) + g X

> k

mkhk(uk) (13) where hk(uk) represents the vertical height of node 

k. This approach enables us to separate the quadratic and linear terms, allowing us to train both spring constants kij and masses mk simultaneously using the Jacobian pseudo-inverse method. To ad-dress the complexity of gradient computation, we restrict to a small linear spring network (Fig. 2), in which parameter updates are computed via the Ja-cobian of the output displacements with respect to the spring constants. 

Iris dataset features as force inputs. We now demonstrate how a mechanical system equipped with a quadratic readout can implement target-referenced contrastive learning using a pseudoinverse update rule. While the classification task itself is standard, the purpose of this example is not to op-timize accuracy but to show how a physical sys-tem can internalize a nonlinear decision boundary through Mode B geometry. We use a 6 × 6 trian-gular lattice as a linear spring network. The Iris features are encoded as dimensionless input vectors ˜f ∈ R4, which act as abstract forcing patterns rather than physical loads. Instead of interpreting these in-puts as displacements or forces with physical units, we treat them as coordinates in a normalized input space and define a dimensionless objective function that couples the network’s mechanical response to a learned quadratic form. Specifically, the spring network produces a physical elastic energy Espring ,7which we nondimensionalize by a reference energy scale E0,˜Espring = Espring 

E0

. (14) We then define a dimensionless quadratic functional 

F (˜f ) = ˜f ⊤W ˜f + b⊤˜f + c, (15) where W , b, and c are dimensionless parameters learned during training. The total dimensionless readout is ˜Ftotal = F (˜f ) + α ˜Espring , (16) where α is a dimensionless coupling coefficient that controls the relative contribution of the mechani-cal response. The two-dimensional feature space is ( ˜Ftotal , ˜dmax ), where ˜dmax is the normalized maxi-mum displacement, is used for classification. 

Training using PCPL Mode B. Training is per-formed using a pseudoinverse learning rule. In par-ticular, the Jacobian takes the form 

J = vec( ˜f˜f ⊤), ˜f , 1. (17) To then determine the update ∆ θ, we use Tikhonov regularization in Equation 10. Finally, the parame-ters are updated using a learning rate η as 

θnew = θ + η ∆θ, (18) which is used to update the parameters W , b, and 

c. In each epoch, the spring network is solved using the current input vector, producing ˜Espring , while the quadratic functional is evaluated using the same input. 

Classification thresholding. We evaluated three decision strategies for classification, which differ in how the learned mechanical responses are mapped to discrete class labels: 

• Case 1: Scalar level matching in Ftotal .

Each sample is assigned to the class whose tar-get value tc is closest to the observed scalar readout Ftotal , i.e., arg min  

> c

|Ftotal − tc| .

Here, the tc are class-specific reference values learned during training. Using this nearest-scalar readout rule, the system achieved 90 .67% test accuracy after 500 epochs with learning rate η = 0 .001. 

• Case 2: Adaptive boundary classifica-tion in scalar–displacement space. To map mechanical responses to discrete behav-ioral classes, we also employ an adaptive two-threshold classifier derived directly from the distribution of training data. For each input force pattern, the model computes a combined scalar response Etot = EFEM +f ⊤W f +b·f +c, 

where EFEM is the physical strain energy from the lattice simulation and the quadratic form represents the learned energetic contribution. In parallel, we extract the maximum nodal displacement Dmax from the mechanical solu-tion. Class boundaries are then determined adaptively from training-set extrema rather than fixed parameters. Specifically, an energy threshold 

E∗ = 12

  min E0 + max( E1, E 2)

separates class 0 from the union of classes 1 and 2. Within the low-energy regime Etot ≤

E∗, a second threshold 

D∗ = 12

  max D1 + min D2



distinguishes class 1 from class 2. The re-sulting decision rule is therefore hierarchical: energy first partitions responses into “high-energy” versus “low-energy” behaviors, after which displacement resolves the low-energy cases into distinct mechanical states. Because both thresholds are recomputed from the cur-rent training distribution, the decision bound-ary adapts automatically to shifts in system stiffness, geometry, or learned parameters. 

• Case 3: Mechanically grounded scalar classification. In this strategy, the learned quadratic readout is removed, and classifica-tion is based solely on a scalar summary of the spring network’s mechanical response. For each input force pattern, the network is solved to mechanical equilibrium, producing a dis-placement field u. From this state, we compute a dimensionless scalar measure of deformation, 

Smech = 12 u⊤Ku, 

which reflects the global elastic response of the lattice rather than a direct algebraic function of the inputs. Because the equilibrium dis-placements arise from a coupled force-balance problem, the mapping from input features to 

Smech is geometrically nonlinear, even though the energy expression itself is quadratic in 

u. Class boundaries are determined adap-tively from gaps in the training distributions of Smech . Specifically, two scalar thresholds are defined as 

b1 = 12

  max S0+min S1

, b2 = 12

  max S1+min S2

,8where Si denotes the set of mechanical scalar responses for class i. The resulting decision rule is therefore a two-level threshold classifier operating in a one-dimensional, mechanically generated feature space. Because the thresh-olds are recomputed from the current train-ing distribution, the classifier adapts automat-ically to changes in stiffness, geometry, and learned parameters while remaining grounded in physically measurable quantities. 

Performance. Figure 3 shows the decision bound-ary of Case 2 and Case 3, which both yielded higher accuracy than Case 1. The difference in classifica-tion accuracy across Cases 1–3 reflects the geometric expressivity of the feature spaces rather than merely the number of thresholds. Case 1 relies on a single scalar readout with nearest-level matching, which restricts the decision rule to affine separations and yields lower accuracy. In contrast, Cases 2 and 3 both employ two-threshold decision rules, but op-erate in nonlinear feature spaces generated by the physical system. Case 2 uses a two-dimensional fea-ture space ( Etot , D max ), enabling separations that exploit independent mechanical response modes and thereby achieving the highest accuracy. Case 3, while also nonlinear, compresses all class informa-tion into a single mechanically generated scalar, lim-iting separability when class clusters overlap along that axis and resulting in slightly reduced perfor-mance relative to Case 2. Interestingly, using a spring network physical learning system with linear classification, prior work reports an average classification accuracy of 96% on the Iris dataset using a 70 /30 train–test split [27]. Under slightly more challenging splits, such as 50 /50, this performance may be expected to decrease further due to both the reduced amount of train-ing data and the restricted representational capacity of linear models, which can only implement affine input–output mappings of the form Ay + b = z.Such mappings are unable to represent curved or topologically nontrivial decision boundaries. This limitation is reflected in our Case 1 , which relies on a scalar-level matching rule in a one-dimensional readout space and therefore inherits the expressivity constraints of linear classifiers. As expected, geometrically nonlinear decision rules can achieve substantially higher performance on this dataset. Indeed, a wide range of nonlinear models report test accuracies approaching ∼ 98% [28], which appears to represent a practical gen-eralization ceiling imposed by intrinsic class over-lap. Our Case 2 , which constructs adaptive deci-sion boundaries in the two-dimensional ( Ftotal , D )feature space, falls into this category: by allowing curved and data-adaptive separations, it achieves             

> FIG. 3. Decision boundaries of case 2 and case 3 for a classical spring network in a gravitational field: Left - Hybrid system classification using adaptive thresholds in Ftotal vs. displacement space achieves 100% test ac-curacy. Right - Pure mechanical system classification using Etotal (linear strain energy) with gap-based energy thresholds achieves 96% accuracy, where both stiffness matrix Kand masses bare trained via Jacobian pseu-doinverse with parameter perturbation.

100% test accuracy for particular train–test parti-tions. Importantly, such perfect separation should be interpreted as a finite-sample geometric effect rather than evidence that the intrinsic limit has been exceeded. For specific splits, the learned boundaries may align favorably with the data geometry, but this behavior is not expected to persist under repeated randomized splits or cross-validation. Finally, Case 3 introduces an additional layer of nonlinearity through the mechanically-mediated mapping between inputs and scalar readouts, al-lowing the classifier to exploit structure induced by the spring network itself. While still subject to 9the same intrinsic data overlap constraints, this me-chanically grounded nonlinearity provides a distinct route to enhanced expressivity that differs funda-mentally from purely algebraic nonlinear classifiers. Together, these results highlight the tradeoff be-tween computational simplicity and geometric ex-pressivity, and clarify the distinction between split-specific performance and intrinsic generalization lim-its.  

> B. Continuous Variable Photonic Circuits as Contrastive Learners

We now show that the same PCPL framework applies to continuous-variable (CV) photonic sys-tems. For convenience, we employ the standard Gaussian-state formalism of continuous-variable op-tics and represent optical modes using bra-ket nota-tion. Because the examples considered here remain entirely within the Gaussian sector, they also ad-mit an equivalent description in terms of classical optical field amplitudes. The learning logic, how-ever, remains unchanged: perturb, contrast, and up-date. Let us build continuous variable photonic cir-cuits out of the following components: displacement gates D(α), phase shift, a.k.a. phase-space rotation, gates R(ϕi), beam splitter gates, BS( θ, ϕ ) to cre-ate two-mode couplings, and squeezing gates. The circuit will contain modifiable parameters so that it can learn to classify objects, for example. Using our learning notation, F prepares photonic states (F : x 7 → | ψ(x)⟩), G applies parameterized opera-tions: G : |ψ(x)⟩ , θ 7 → | ψ(x; θ)⟩.As the parameter contrast in Mode A [29] is given by ∆ θ = M (ψfree , ψ nudged ) depending on the read-out, the update becomes one of the following, ∆θi 

> phase

= αi · (⟨ ˆXi⟩nudged − ⟨ ˆXi⟩free ), (19) ∆θi 

> sq

= (Var( ˆXi)nudged − Var( ˆXi)free ), (20) ∆θij  

> bs

= (Cov( ˆXi, ˆXj )nudged − Cov( ˆXi, ˆXj )free ).

(21) Similarly, a Mode B (target-referenced) contrast can be written generally as ∆ θ = M (ψtarget , ψ nudged )with the following possible readouts ∆θi 

> phase

= αi



⟨ ˆXi⟩nudged − ⟨ ˆXi⟩target 



, (22) ∆θi 

> sq

=



Var( ˆXi)nudged − Var( ˆXi)target 



, (23) ∆θij  

> bs

=



Cov( ˆXi, ˆXj )nudged − Cov( ˆXi, ˆXj )target 



.

(24)  

> 1. Gaussian CV photonic (using linear optical gates) circuit

This example demonstrates how Mode B PCPL can be implemented in a CV photonic circuit to per-form Iris classification. Classical input features are encoded into Gaussian optical states, and learning proceeds through measurement contrasts that drive pseudoinverse (Gauss–Newton–like) parameter up-dates. 

Circuit architecture and component opera-tions. The input feature vector x ∈ R4 is en-coded into a four-mode photonic system using dis-placement gates D(xi) applied to the vacuum state. These displacements shift the expectation values of the position quadratures, embedding classical data into photonic phase space. The displaced modes then pass through parameterized Gaussian opera-tions consisting of rotation gates R(ψi) and a net-work of beam splitter gates BS ij (θk, ϕ k) that mix quadratures and couple modes. Finally, a set of beam splitters concentrates the information into a single mode, and the expectation value of its posi-tion quadrature ⟨ˆx0⟩ is measured via x-quadrature mean measurements. See Fig. 4. Let us more specif-ically analyze how the sequence of Gaussian opera-tions transforms ⟨ˆx0⟩.1. Initial State : The vacuum state has ⟨ˆxi⟩ =

⟨ˆpi⟩ = 0, or equivalently αi ≡ ⟨ ˆai⟩ = 0, for all modes i ∈ { 0, 1, 2, 3}.2. Displacement Operation : The ampli-tude displacement gate Di(xi ∈ R) =exp  −i√2 xiPi

, applied to each mode i, shifts the initial amplitude αi:

αi → αi + xi (25) so that after displacement, αi becomes 0 + xi.3. Rotation Operation : The rotation gate 

Ri(ψi) = exp( iψ i ˆni) acts on the complex am-plitude as a phase shift: 

αi → eiψ i αi = eiψ i xi. (26) Collectively across all four modes, this defines the diagonal unitary 

UR = diag( eiψ 0 , e iψ 1 , e iψ 2 , e iψ 3 ) ∈ U (4) (27) so that ⃗α → U R x. The rotation angles {ψi}3

> i=0

therefore control the complex phase of each mode’s contribution to the output. 4. Beam Splitter Network : The beam splitter 

BS ij (θk, ϕ k) acts as a U (2) rotation on the pair 10                            

> x0|0⟩0D(x1)R(ψ1)
> UL1 :BS 01 (θ1, ϕ 1)UL2 :BS 02 (θ3, ϕ 3)
> Uf:BS 03
>  π
> 4,0
> Uf:BS 01
>  π
> 4,0
> |0⟩1D(x2)R(ψ2)
> UL2 :BS 13 (θ4, ϕ 4)
> |0⟩2D(x3)R(ψ3)
> UL1 :BS 23 (θ2, ϕ 2)
> |0⟩3D(x4)R(ψ4)

FIG. 4. Four-mode Gaussian photonic circuit for linear classification. Each mode is initialized in vacuum |0⟩,displaced by D(xi), and rotated by R(ϕi), giving UR = diag( eiϕ 1 , . . . , e iϕ 4 ). This can be implemented by phase modulating lasers of tunable power. The first beam splitter layer UL1 = BS 01 (θ1, ϕ 1) ⊕ BS 23 (θ2, ϕ 2) and second layer UL2 = BS 02 (θ3, ϕ 3) ⊕ BS 13 (θ4, ϕ 4) mix the modes using 8 trainable parameters. The fixed concentration layer 

Uf = BS 03 (π/ 4, 0) · BS 01 (π/ 4, 0) concentrates information into mode 0. x-quadrature mean measurements yields 

⟨ˆx0⟩ = P 

> i

Wixi, where Wi = √2 Re[( UBS )0i eiϕ i ] and UBS = Uf UL2 UL1 .

(αi, α j ): 

αi

αj



→

 cos θk −eiϕ k sin θk

e−iϕ k sin θk cos θk

  αi

αj



. (28) Its extension to the full four-mode space is: 

gBS ij (θk, ϕ k) = 

BS ij (θk, ϕ k) 00 I2



> (i,j,k,l )

∈ U (4) ,

(29) where the subscript (i, j, k, l ) indicates the row/column ordering with {k, l } = {0, 1, 2, 3}\ {i, j } being the unchanged modes. The layer unitaries are then products of these extended operators: 

UL1 = gBS 01 (θ1, ϕ 1) · gBS 23 (θ2, ϕ 2) ∈ U (4) (30) 

UL2 = gBS 02 (θ3, ϕ 3) · gBS 13 (θ4, ϕ 4) ∈ U (4) (31) 

Uf = gBS 03 

  π 

> 4

, 0 · gBS 01 

  π 

> 4

, 0 ∈ U (4) (32) The full circuit applies the following sequence of operations to the initial state ⃗α = x (see Fig. 4): ⃗α out = Uf UL2 UL1 UR x ≡ UBS UR x, (33) where UBS ≡ Uf UL2 UL1 ∈ U (4). Reading off the zeroth component, with e0 = (1 , 0, 0, 0) ⊤:

αout 0 =  e⊤ 

> 0

UBS UR

 x =

> 3

X

> i=0

 UBS 

 

> 0i

eiϕ i xi. (34) The x-quadrature measurement of mode 0 then yields: 

⟨ˆx0⟩ = √2 Re  αout 0

 = √2

> 3

X

> i=0

Re   UBS 

 

> 0i

eiϕ i  xi

≡

> 3

X

> i=0

Wi xi, (35) where the effective classifier weights are: 

Wi = √2 Re   UBS 

 

> 0i

eiϕ i  . (36) The 12 trainable parameters {ϕi}3 

> i=0

∪ { θk, ϕ k}4

> k=1

jointly determine the effective linear classifier weights {Wi} through the composite map UBS UR.Consequently, the circuit output can be viewed as an inner product: 

⟨ˆx0⟩ = W · x =

> 3

X

> i=0

Wi xi (37) where W = ( W0, W 1, W 2, W 3)⊤ ∈ R4 is the effective weight vector and x ∈ R4 is the input feature vector. Despite operating on photonic states, the measured output is thus a linear function of the classical in-puts, with the photonic circuit parameterizing the weight vector W through the unitary degrees of free-dom. 

Nonlinearity via Jacobian pseudoinverse up-dates. Although the instantaneous circuit output is linear in the inputs, ⟨ˆx0⟩ = W(θ) · x, the parameter update rule introduces an effective nonlinearity. The Jacobian matrix J ∈ RN ×12 , stacked over a batch of 

N samples, has entries: 

Jki = ∂⟨ˆx0⟩(k)

∂θ i

= ∂W(θ)

∂θ i

· x(k) ≡ gi(θ) · x(k),

(38) where gi(θ) = ∂W/∂θ i is generally nonlinear in 

θ through the trigonometric dependence of UBS .Moreover, there are other sources of nonlinearity. First, if the true input-output relationship is non-linear, the stacked system J ∆θ = e is overdeter-mined and inconsistent — no single linear weight vector W can satisfy all N equations simultaneously. The pseudoinverse solution then finds a least-squares compromise across the batch, whose effective be-havior depends nonlinearly on the data distribution 11 

{(x(k), e(k))}. Second, given that the update rule for Mode B contains J⊤J, the entries (J⊤J)ij =

> N

X

> k=1

 gi · x(k)  gj · x(k) (39) are quadratic in x(k). The matrix inverse ( J⊤J +

λI )−1 then promotes this to a rational function of 

{x(k)}, analogous to a polynomial kernel K(x, x′) = (x·x′)2. Therefore, although Jki is linear in x(k), the 

multiplication of two such linear terms in J⊤J that breaks linearity of the update rule, while the mini-batch overdetermination additionally encodes the nonlinear structure of the data distribution. In sum, the learned input-output map remains linear in the input features once training is complete. The non-linearity enters the learning dynamics rather than the inference map. 

Mini-batch implementation. Training proceeds using mini-batches of input samples, each encoded into a separate preparation of the photonic circuit. For a batch of size N , the Jacobian becomes an 

N × q matrix, and the pseudoinverse update inte-grates response information across multiple inputs simultaneously. This improves numerical condition-ing of the update and reduces the influence of mea-surement noise, while remaining compatible with se-quential experimental execution in hardware imple-mentations. In our implementation, a mini-batch of size 5 cor-responds to evaluating five independent four-mode Gaussian circuits. Each input x ∈ R4 is encoded via displacement gates across four modes. Denoting 

z(+)  

> kj

= ⟨ˆx0⟩k(θj + ε) and zkj = ⟨ˆx0⟩k(θj ) as the per-turbed and unperturbed x-quadrature mean outputs for the k-th sample and j-th parameter, the Jacobian entries can be directly expressed using the bilinear form: 

Jkj = ∂⟨ˆx0⟩k

∂θ j

≃ M (z(+)  

> kj

, z kj )(θj + ε) − θj

= z(+)  

> kj

− zkj 

ε (40) =

> 3

X

> i=0

Pij · xki 

where xki is the i-th feature of the k-th sample. This makes clear that P emerges implicitly from the physical measurements without ever being explicitly constructed. For a batch of N samples, we can write the full Jacobian matrix as: 

J = XP (41) where X ∈ RN ×4 is the input data matrix and P ∈

R4×q contains the fixed coefficients Pij .Using this notation, the pseudoinverse update be-comes: ∆θ = ( JT J + λI )−1JT e (42) = (( XP )T (XP ) + λI )−1(XP )T e (43) = ( P T XT XP + λI )−1P T XT e (44) where e = z∗ − z is the error vector between the target and x-quadrature mean outputs, as defined previously. During training, the parameter vector θ traces a trajectory through the parameter space Rq . This trajectory is guided by: 

θt+1 = θt + η∆θt. (45) The learning rate η controls the step size along this trajectory. 

Classification from continuous measurements. 

Because the circuit produces a continuous scalar out-put ⟨ˆx0⟩, classification is performed by mapping this value into discrete labels using two adaptive thresh-olds t1 < t 2. At each training step, the thresholds are updated as the midpoints between the mean out-puts of adjacent classes, 

tk ← (1 − γ) tk + γ μk + μk+1 

2 , k = 1 , 2,

where μk denotes the mean measured output for class k within the current mini-batch and γ > 0is a damping factor. The decision rule is then class = 



0, ⟨ˆx0⟩ < t 1,

1, t1 ≤ ⟨ ˆx0⟩ < t 2,

2, ⟨ˆx0⟩ ≥ t2.

This adaptive scheme ensures the thresholds track shifts in the circuit’s learned response while remain-ing grounded in physically measurable observables. 

Performance. With a 50%/50% train/test split over 25 independent trials, the test accuracy ranges from 96 .0% to 100 .0%, with a mean of 97 .7% ± 0.9% (20 epochs). See Fig. 5. Notably, this perfor-mance is achieved using only Gaussian operations and x-quadrature measurements, without invoking intrinsic photonic nonlinearities. The classifier’s ex-pressivity arises from the geometry of the circuit’s input–output map and the conditioning of its Ja-cobian under parameter perturbations. The pseu-doinverse update succeeds because its physically re-alizable response manifold supports well-conditioned Gauss–Newton–like corrections. This demonstrates that PCPL learning performance depends primar-ily on how a physical system structures param-eter sensitivities, rather than on the presence of specific computational primitives. More generally, 12 PCPL is compatible with nonlinear circuitry, includ-ing squeezing, and, in principle, other quantum mea-surement schemes, including photon-number detec-tion, so long as measurable contrasts between nearby responses can be used to generate update signals. 

Changing circuit architecture. To understand what aspects of the circuit enable effective Mode B learning, we systematically altered the circuit archi-tecture and examined how these changes affected learning performance. First, removing the final mode-concentration stage did not significantly affect accuracy. This indicates that compressing informa-tion into a single mode is not essential for expres-sivity in this task; the measured observable remains a linear function of the encoded inputs regardless of where mode mixing occurs. In contrast, relocat-ing the rotation gates to the end of the circuit re-duced accuracy to approximately 92 .0% (base accu-racy 97 .33%). This modification alters how param-eter perturbations influence the measured quadra-ture, effectively distorting the sensitivity directions encoded in the Jacobian. Introducing squeezing operations at the beginning of the circuit further degraded performance to ap-proximately 81 .3%. Squeezing introduces nonlinear-ities and so reshapes the circuit’s response mani-fold and can lead to a poorly conditioned Jacobian, making the local inverse problem harder to solve us-ing linearized pseudoinverse updates. Similarly, fix-ing the beam splitter parameters reduced accuracy to approximately 78 .7%, demonstrating that mode-mixing flexibility is crucial for spanning independent sensitivity directions in parameter space. Reintro-ducing trainable displacement scaling partially re-stored performance to approximately 92 .0%, show-ing that increasing the space of modifiable parame-ters can recover controllability of the output mani-fold. In sum, these architectural perturbations demon-strate that learning success depends primarily on how circuit structure shapes the conditioning and expressivity of the Jacobian. Operations that pre-serve a well-conditioned mapping between param-eter perturbations and measurable outputs enable stable Gauss–Newton–like corrections, whereas op-erations that distort or restrict this mapping degrade learning. This underscores that PCPL performance is governed by response geometry rather than circuit complexity alone.  

> 2. Tunable linear optical multiplier: Towards an Autonomous Physical Learner

Mode B PCPL requires a local update signal pro-portional to the product of a sensitivity and an error.            

> (a) Best Classification (100 .0%)
> (b) Batch size N= 5, η= 0 .1FIG. 5. Classification accuracy via mini-batch pseudoin-verse nudging. (a) distribution of photonic measure-ment outcomes by class showing clear separation be-tween Class 0 (blue, centered at -1), Class 1 (orange, centered at 0), and Class 2 (green), achieving 100.0% classification accuracy. (b) Training convergence using mini-batch pseudoinverse nudging with batch size N= 5 and learning rate η= 0 .1, reaching nearly perfect accu-racy within 10 epochs.

In classical gradient descent learning, this appears as ∆θ ∝

 ∂f ∂θ 

  ztarget − z, (46) so any fully physical implementation of PCPL must be able to generate such multiplicative sig-nals from measurable contrasts. Here we address the complementary requirement: whether the mul-tiplication of that sensitivity by an error signal can itself be realized within a physical optical system. The mechanism we exploit—interference between displacement-encoded optical modes followed by quadrature measurement—relies only on linear op-tical elements and coherent states. As a result, an equivalent multiplier could in principle be im-plemented using purely classical electromagnetic fields. Interference of classical optical amplitudes and square-law detection have long been used in analog optical processors to perform multiplicative and convolution-like operations. The present con-struction does not claim novelty at the level of op-13 tical physics; rather, its significance lies in embed-ding such interference-based multiplication directly into the structure of a PCPL learning rule. In this sense, the circuit functions as a physical gradient unit , translating contrast measurements into update signals within the same substrate that performs in-ference. This represents a step toward partially au-tonomous physical learners, in which not only infer-ence but also elements of the update rule are imple-mented directly in the physical substrate. We define a physical learning system as autonomous to the ex-tent that components of the parameter-update rule are implemented within the same physical substrate that performs inference, rather than being computed by an external digital processor. 

Goal. Our goal is to construct a linear optical cir-cuit whose measured output approximates the ana-log product δf ·e, thereby embedding a fundamental part of the learning operation into the measurement process. We consider two approaches within linear optics. In the first approach, the signals δf and 

e are encoded into quadrature amplitudes via dis-placement gates and the encoded modes are coupled through a beam splitter. A linear fit is then ap-plied to x-quadrature mean measurements outcomes to find parameters that minimize the approximation error. Note this gives you δf ± e, ie, δf and e sepa-rately, not their product. In the second approach, we exploit the intensity-difference property of a beam splitter. Encoding δf 

and e into the two input modes, the beam splitter produces output amplitudes α0 = ( δf − e)/√2 and 

α1 = ( δf + e)/√2. The difference of squared direct detection then yields 

δf ε · e = α21 − α20

2 · ε ≈ gk, (47) where gk is the gradient estimate weighted by the er-ror, obtained from intensity measurements or classi-cal post-processing of x-quadrature outputs, scaled by the fixed perturbation size ε, so the product (δf /ε ) · e can be recovered directly from the inten-sity measurement without requiring any nonlinear optical elements. Both approaches yield comparable final classification accuracy. 

Implementation. The parameter update is imple-mented by a second CV circuit in which each param-eter mode is initialized via a displacement D(θk) and the scaled gradient is added by a second displace-ment D(ηg k), so that the updated value is read from the quadrature mean ⟨ˆxk⟩/2 = θk + ηg k. This min-imal circuit thus represents a CV self-learning sys-tem in which gradient computation and parameter update all occur within integrated Gaussian circuits, with the exception of classical finite-difference per-turbations used to evaluate δf and parameter clip-Classical finite difference                                                

> δf k=f(x;θk+ε)−f(x;θ)
> e=ytrue −f(x;θ)
> ⟨ˆx0⟩(k)
> ⟨ˆx1⟩(k)
> |0⟩(k)0D(δf k,0)
> BS (π/ 4,0)
> |0⟩(k)1D(e, 0)
> BS multiplier circuit (2 modes; fixed 50/50 BS; runs 12 ×per sample)
> δf k, e
> Classical post-processing
> gk=α21−α20
> 2·1
> εwhere αi=⟨ˆxi⟩
> 2
> ⟨ˆx0⟩(k),⟨ˆx1⟩(k)
> ⟨ˆxk⟩|0⟩kD(θk,0) D(ηg k,0)
> D gate parameter update (12 modes; representative mode k)
> g1, . . . , g 12
> θk← ⟨ ˆxk⟩/2 = θk+ηg k

FIG. 6. Simplest linear optical learning circuit for Iris dataset classification. The circuit consists of a classi-cal finite-difference block, a two-mode CV BS multiplier circuit for gradient computation (run once per param-eter per sample), a classical post-processing block for intensity-difference readout, and a 12-mode D gate pa-rameter update circuit with x-quadrature mean readout. 

ping applied to the updates. See Fig. 6. We now incorporate the linear optical multiplier into the larger linear optical learning circuit. To classify the Iris dataset, the system uses a 4-mode photonic classifier with 12 trainable parameters (4 rotation angles and 8 beam splitter parameters). The classifier encodes iris features through displace-ment gates ˆD(xi), applies learnable rotations ˆR(θi), and processes the state through two layers of pa-rameterized beam splitters followed by an additional adaptive rotation layer and two final beam splitter operations. The forward pass produces a continuous 

x-quadrature mean measurement output. 

Performance. The minimal two-mode linear opti-cal multiplier performs parameter updates through a dedicated two-mode displacement circuit: each pa-rameter mode is initialized by ˆD(θk) and the scaled gradient is added by ˆD(ηg k), so the updated value is recovered as ⟨ˆxk⟩/2 = θk + ηg k. No additional processing stages are involved. The system achieves 96 .2% ± 2.3% (Configuration A, 20 epochs)/training and testing accuracy for the Iris dataset (25 inde-pendent realizations), demonstrating that photonic 14 physical self-learning with photonic-computed gradi-ents is feasible. See Appendix C for an example with squeezing as well as the effect of circuit architecture on the performance.  

> IV. DISCUSSION

This work introduces Perturbative Contrastive Physical Learning (PCPL) as a unifying principle for learning in physical systems. Rather than defin-ing learning through explicit gradients of a loss func-tion, PCPL frames learning as the measurable con-trast between nearby physical states produced by controlled perturbations. In this view, the funda-mental primitive of learning is not symbolic differ-entiation but experimentally accessible response. By elevating contrast to the central role, PCPL provides a substrate-independent description of learning that applies equally to mechanical, optical, and photonic systems. This reframing shifts the question from “How does one compute gradients?” to “What con-trasts can a physical system sense and translate into parameter change?” A key insight of the PCPL framework is the dis-tinction between two learning geometries. Mode A learning probes local sensitivity: the system com-pares its response before and after a small internal perturbation, effectively measuring a Jacobian ac-tion. Mode B learning performs local inversion: con-trasts between nudged responses and targets induce Gauss–Newton–like parameter updates governed by the natural metric of the system’s input–output map. Importantly, this inverse geometry need not be computed explicitly. In the physical implemen-tations shown here, the effective metric emerges im-plicitly from the system’s response, demonstrating that metric-aware learning can be realized through local perturbation and measurement rather than global matrix inversion. In the two platforms, a spring network and a CV photonic gates based cir-cuit, learning is successful, suggesting that learning performance in physical substrates depends less on whether a system is classical or photonic, and more on how its architecture shapes the conditioning and expressivity of its response manifold. The tunable continuous-variable photonic multi-plier extends this idea by embedding part of the learning rule itself as part of the physical substrate. By implementing an analog multiplication between a sensitivity signal and an error signal through op-tical interference, we show that a core computa-tional primitive of Gauss–Newton learning can mi-grate from classical post-processing into the physi-cal substrate. This represents an initial step toward autonomous physical learners in which inference and elements of parameter update emerge from the same substrate. In such systems, learning is no longer an algorithm imposed from outside, but an algorithmic process shaped by the system’s own response geom-etry. Previous work has demonstrated that physical systems can be trained through response-based adaptation, including the programming of stress and strain patterns in spring networks and cell packings in disordered materials [30, 31]. These approaches emphasize experimentally realizable update rules, often with a strong focus on strictly local adaptation. PCPL does not adopt locality as a defining princi-ple. Instead, it is organized around the geometry of physically measurable contrasts and the contrast measurement functional M need not act on strictly local observables. In fact, the measurable contrasts may involve collective, nonlocal, interferometric, or globally encoded response variables, provided that they contain sufficient information about the under-lying response geometry of the system. In Mode A, these contrasts probe local sensitivities, while in Mode B they can encode information about a global inverse problem through the system’s collective re-sponse. Importantly, this does not imply central-ized learning: no external processor computes gra-dients or inverts system-wide Jacobians. Instead, the learning signals arise directly from the system’s own physical response to controlled perturbations. While the resulting updates can reflect global prop-erties of the system, such as collective modes, long-range couplings, or inverse-problem geometry, these effects are mediated through the substrate’s intrinsic response rather than through an explicit global opti-mization algorithm. In other words, the system does not require a separate computational layer with ac-cess to a full model of its state; the effective learning geometry emerges implicitly from measurable con-trasts between nearby physical configurations. In PCPL, by contrast, the “computation” of update directions is distributed across the physical degrees of freedom themselves, and is realized through ex-perimentally accessible perturbation–response mea-surements rather than algorithmic inversion. PCPL therefore occupies an intermediate regime between strictly local adaptation and centrally computed gra-dient descent, demonstrating that nonlocal learning behavior can arise without centralized algorithmic control. As for experimental implications, the optical char-acter of CV circuit brings about the distinct pos-sibility of physical learning with low energy con-sumption compared to Joule-heating electronic cir-cuits, even if one must take into account the amount of laser power necessary to drive the circuit and, specifically, to pump the optical parametric oscilla-15 tors that produce squeezed light. Nevertheless, per-spectives are enticing, especially in light of the con-stantly evolving state of the art of integrated photon-ics [32], as integration begets scalability. Learning with continuous quantum variables using Gaussian and non-Gaussian gates [33] has been studied ex-tensively, including Continuous-Variable Quantum Neural Networks [34] and relevant applications to state classification (with classical feedforward post-processing) [35] and time-series forecasting (with classical optimization) [36]. In addition, recent work has demonstrated that learning can be implemented in linear optical interferometers with coherent states and homodyne measurements [37]. These studies demonstrate that CV quantum circuits can be used for learning tasks; however, classical computational processing blocks are still required. In other words, to realize a fully autonomous quantum learning sys-tem, aka a quantum creature, perturbations, con-trasts using single-shot measurements, multiplica-tion/error couplings, and parameter updates are all implemented within the quantum substrate itself. We are currently working towards this goal. More broadly, PCPL expands the notion of what constitutes a learnable parameter. In physical sys-tems, modifiable degrees of freedom include not only coupling strengths but also geometry, boundary con-ditions, and even interpretive mappings between physical states and functional outputs. By defin-ing learnability operationally—through what can be perturbed and sensed—PCPL shifts the focus from abstract optimization to experimentally accessible contrasts between physical states. This perspec-tive opens pathways for designing adaptive mate-rials, programmable photonic circuits, hybrid classi-cal–quantum, and fully quantum, platforms, where learning is embedded directly in physical laws. 

Acknowledgements. We thank Benjamin Scellier for useful discussions. JMS acknowledges finan-cial support from the National Science Founda-tion via DMR-2204312. OP was supported by National Science Foundation grants OSI-2531569 [NQVL:QSTD:Design: Quantum Computing Appli-cations of Photonics (QCAP)], PHY-2514971, and ECCS-2530171. 

[1] Donald O. Hebb. The Organization of Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory . Wiley, New York, 1949. [2] Peter Dayan and Larry F. Abbott. Theoretical Neu-roscience: Computational and Mathematical Model-ing of Neural Systems . MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2001. [3] Chris R. Reid, Tanya Latty, Audrey Dussutour, and Madeleine Beekman. Slime mold uses an external-ized spatial memory to navigate in complex envi-ronments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 113(47):E7051–E7058, 2016. [4] Ian Goodfellow, Yoshua Bengio, and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning . MIT Press, 2016. [5] Benjamin Scellier and Yoshua Bengio. Equilibrium propagation: Bridging the gap between energy-based models and backpropagation. Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience , Volume 11 - 2017, 2017. [6] Logan G. Wright, Tatsuhiro Onodera, Martin M. Stein, Tianyu Wang, Darren T. Schachter, Zoey Hu, and Peter L. McMahon. Deep physical neu-ral networks trained with backpropagation. Nature ,601(7894):549–555, 2022. [7] Menachem Stern and Arvind Murugan. Learning without neurons in physical systems. Annual Re-view of Condensed Matter Physics , 14(Volume 14, 2023):417–441, 2023. [8] Ali Momeni, Babak Rahmani, Benjamin Scellier, Logan G. Wright, Peter L. McMahon, Clara C. Wanjura, Yuhang Li, Anas Skalli, Natalia G. Berloff, Tatsuhiro Onodera, et al. Training of physi-cal neural networks. Nature , 645(8079):53–61, 2025. [9] J´ er´ emie Laydevant, Logan G Wright, Tianyu Wang, and Peter L McMahon. The hardware is the soft-ware. Neuron , 112(2):180–183, 2024. [10] Benjamin Scellier. A deep learning theory for neu-ral networks grounded in physics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.09985 , 2021. [11] Menachem Stern, Daniel Hexner, Jason W. Rocks, and Andrea J. Liu. Supervised learning in physical networks: From machine learning to learning ma-chines. Physical Review X , 11(2):021045, 2021. [12] Menachem Stern, Marcelo Guzman, Felipe Martins, Andrea J. Liu, and Vijay Balasubramanian. Physi-cal networks become what they learn. Physical Re-view Letters , 134(14):147402, 2025. [13] Sam Dillavou, Menachem Stern, Andrea J. Liu, and Douglas J. Durian. Demonstration of decentralized physics-driven learning. Physical Review Applied ,18(1):014040, 2022. [14] Lauren E. Altman, Menachem Stern, Andrea J. Liu, and Douglas J. Durian. Experimental demonstra-tion of coupled learning in elastic networks. Phys. Rev. Appl. , 22:024053, Aug 2024. [15] Sam Dillavou, Benjamin D. Beyer, Menachem Stern, Andrea J. Liu, Marc Z. Miskin, and Dou-glas J. Durian. Emergent learning in a nonlin-ear analog network. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 2024. [16] Vidyesh Rao Anisetti, Benjamin Scellier, and J. M. Schwarz. Learning by non-interfering feedback chemical signaling in physical networks. Physical Review Research , 5:023024, 2023. [17] Vidyesh Rao Anisetti, Ananth Kandala, Benjamin 16 

Scellier, and J. M. Schwarz. Frequency propagation: Multimechanism learning in nonlinear physical net-works. Neural Computation , 36(4):596–620, 2024. [18] Martin J. Falk, Adam T. Strupp, Benjamin Scel-lier, and Arvind Murugan. Temporal contrastive learning through implicit non-equilibrium memory. 

Nature Communications , 16(1):2163, 2025. [19] Benjamin Scellier. Quantum equilibrium propaga-tion: Gradient-descent training of quantum sys-tems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.00879 , 2024. [20] Clara C. Wanjura and Florian Marquardt. Quan-tum equilibrium propagation for efficient training of quantum systems based on onsager reciprocity. 

Nature Communications , 16(1):6595, 2025. [21] Mile Gu, Christian Weedbrook, Nicolas C. Menicucci, Timothy C. Ralph, and Peter van Loock. Quantum computing with continuous-variable clus-ters. Physical Review A , 79:062318, 2009. [22] Nicolas C. Menicucci, Steven T. Flammia, and Olivier Pfister. One-way quantum computing in the optical frequency comb. Physical Review Letters ,101:130501, 2008. [23] Olivier Pfister. Continuous-variable quantum com-puting in the quantum optical frequency comb. 

Journal of Physics B: Atomic, Molecular and Op-tical Physics , 53(1):012001, 2020. [24] Nathan Killoran, Thomas R. Bromley, Juan Miguel Arrazola, Maria Schuld, Nicol´ as Quesada, and Seth Lloyd. Continuous-variable quantum neural net-works. Physical Review Research , 1:033063, 2019. [25] Maria Schuld, Ville Bergholm, Christian Gogolin, Josh Izaac, and Nathan Killoran. Evaluating ana-lytic gradients on quantum hardware. Physical Re-view A , 99:032331, 2019. [26] Dong-Hyun Lee, Saizheng Zhang, Asja Fischer, and Yoshua Bengio. Difference target propagation. In 

Joint european conference on machine learning and knowledge discovery in databases , pages 498–515. Springer, 2015. [27] Shuailong Li and Xinqiao Mao. Training all-mechanical neural networks for task learning through in situ backpropagation. Nature Commu-nications , 15(1):10528, 2024. [28] Heru Nugroho, Nugraha Priya Utama, and Kridanto Surendro. Performance evaluation for class center-based missing data imputation algorithm. In Pro-ceedings of the 2020 9th International Conference on Software and Computer Applications , ICSCA ’20, page 36–40, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery. [29] Benjamin Scellier. Quantum equilibrium propaga-tion: Gradient-descent training of quantum sys-tems. arXiv:2406.00879 [quant-ph] , 2024. [30] Daniel Hexner. Training precise stress patterns. Soft Matter , 19:2120–2126, 2023. [31] Shabeeb Ameen, Tao Zhang, and J. M. Schwarz. Training cell stress patterns in 3d cellular packings. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.25439 , 2026. [32] Wim Bogaerts, Daniel P´ erez, Jos´ e Capmany, David A. B. Miller, Joyce Poon, Dirk Englund, Francesco Morichetti, and Andrea Melloni. Programmable photonic circuits. Nature , 586(7828):207–216, 2020. [33] S. L. Braunstein and P. van Loock. Quantum infor-mation with continuous variables. Rev. Mod. Phys. ,77(2):513, 2005. [34] Nathan Killoran, Thomas R. Bromley, Juan Miguel Arrazola, Maria Schuld, Nicol´ as Quesada, and Seth Lloyd. Continuous-variable quantum neural net-works. Phys. Rev. Res. , 1:033063, Oct 2019. [35] Mohammad Rezaei Shokou and Hossein Davoodi Yeganeh. Hybrid quantum-classical learning of nonlinear entanglement witnesses via continuous-variable quantum neural networks, 2025. [36] Prabhat Anand, M Girish Chandra, and Ankit Khandelwal. Time-series forecasting using contin-uous variables-based quantum neural networks. In 

2024 16th International Conference on COMmuni-cation Systems & NETworkS (COMSNETS) , pages 994–999, 2024. [37] Amanuel Anteneh, Kyungeun Kim, J. M. Schwarz, Israel Klich, and Olivier Pfister. Laser interferome-try as a robust neuromorphic platform for machine learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18047 , 2026. 

APPENDIX A: MODE B GRADIENT DESCENT VS. PSEUDOINVERSE PERFORMANCE COMPARISON 

We compare gradient descent (GD) and the pseu-doinverse update rule on a linear classifier trained on the Iris dataset (50%/50% train–test split, 25 inde-pendent trials). Two experiments are conducted to isolate the effect of the update rule (Fig. 7). First, we sweep the learning rate η over a wide range to test sensitivity: GD requires careful tuning of η,whereas the pseudoinverse update is self-normalizing via ( J⊤J)−1 and therefore robust to the choice of η.Second, we apply uneven feature scaling to introduce ill-conditioning: one feature is amplified by a factor of 10 2 (or 10 3) while another is suppressed by 10 −2

(or 10 −3), creating a highly anisotropic loss land-scape in which GD oscillates or diverges while the pseudoinverse update converges stably. In both ex-periments, adaptive thresholds and parameter clip-ping are deliberately excluded to isolate the effect of the update rule alone; these techniques can improve accuracy by up to 4% in practice. Both methods use a 1-output linear model with fixed thresholds. Table I demonstrates this on a linear classi-fier trained on the Iris dataset: while GD and the pseudoinverse update achieve comparable accu-racy at a well-tuned learning rate ( η = 0 .05–0 .1), GD degrades rapidly for larger η or under feature ill-conditioning, whereas the pseudoinverse update maintains consistent performance throughout. The numerical results in Table I confirm that the pseu-doinverse update of Mode B is robust to hyperpa-rameter choice and input ill-conditioning, a conse-17                               

> Method η= 0 .05 η= 1 .0scaling (10 2,10 −2) scaling (10 3,10 −3)GD 93 .7% ±1.4% 65 .9% ±2.7% 60 .6% ±1.1% 45 .3% ±13 .5% Pseudoinverse 94 .1% ±2.9% 94 .2% ±2.2% 94 .0% ±1.6% 93 .6% ±1.8% TABLE I. Test accuracy for Iris classification(50%/50% split, 25 trials) comparing GD and pseudoinverse update under varying learning rates and feature ill-conditioning. Note that additional techniques such as adaptive thresholds and parameter clipping were deliberately excluded to isolate the effect of the update rule; these can improve accuracy by up to 4% in practice.

quence of its metric-aware correction in the natural geometry of the system’s response manifold. 

> APPENDIX B: MORE DETAILS ON PCPL Least Squares Problem with Tikhonov regularization

For N input samples, we collect the measured quadrature outputs into a vector z ∈ RN and de-fine z∗ as the desired class-dependent targets. As-suming linear response of the system with respect to parameters θ ∈ Rp, the residual e = z∗ − z satisfies 

e ≈ J ∆θ, (48) where J ∈ RN ×p is the Jacobian of the output ob-servable with respect to the system parameters. We seek the parameter update ∆ θ that minimizes the regularized objective min  

> ∆θ

J ∆θ − e 2 + λ ∥∆θ∥2, (49) where the second term λ ∥∆θ∥2 penalizes large pa-rameter updates and λ > 0 controls the strength of regularization. Taking the derivative with respect to ∆θ and setting it to zero yields 

∂∂ ∆θ

h

J ∆θ − e 2 + λ ∥∆θ∥2i

= 2 J⊤(J ∆θ − e) + 2 λ ∆θ = 0, (50) which gives ( J⊤J + λI ) ∆ θ = J⊤e. The closed-form solution is thus the regularized pseudoinverse step ∆θ =  J⊤J + λI −1J⊤e, λ > 0 (51) to arrive at Eq. 10.  

> Linear Response and the Contrast Measurement Functional M

To obtain a direct mapping from parameter per-turbations and M , we start with the approximation 

G(y, θ′) − G(y, θ) ≈ X

> i

∂G ∂θ i

(y, θ) · (θ′ 

> i

− θi). (52) The RHS can be written more compactly using the Jacobian matrix Jθ G of partial derivatives: 

G(y, θ′) − G(y, θ) ≈ Jθ G(y, θ) · (θ′ − θ), (53) where Jθ G(y, θ) is the Jacobian matrix with ele-ments: [Jθ G(y, θ)] j,i = ∂G j

∂θ i

(y, θ), (54) and Gj is the j-th component of the output vector 

G.Similarly, the contrast measurement functional M

applied to the output contrast can be approximated using its own Jacobian: 

M (G(y, θ′), G (y, θ)) 

≈ JGM (G, G ′) · (G(y, θ′) − G(y, θ)) , (55) where G′ = G(y, θ′) and JGM (G, G ′) is the Jaco-bian of the measurement operator with respect to changes in G. Combining these two approximations, we can derive the relationship between parameter perturbations and measurement outputs: 

M (G(y, θ′), G (y, θ)) 

≈ JGM (G, G ′) · (G(y, θ′) − G(y, θ)) ,

≈ JGM (G, G ′) · Jθ G(y, θ) · (θ′ − θ). (56) This gives us a direct mapping from parameter perturbations to measurement outputs through the composition of two Jacobian transformations. 

> Gradient Descent Approximation and Beyond

We start with contrast measurement functionals that satisfy: 

JGM (G, G ′) · Jθ G(y, θ) ≈ γ · ∇ θ L(θ)T , (57) for some positive constant γ and loss function L(θ). One way to achieve this is to design the measurement operator such that: 

JGM (G, G ′) ≈ λ · (Jθ G(y, θ)) +, (58) where ( Jθ G)+ is the pseudoinverse of the Jacobian and λ is a scaling factor. This design choice enables 18            

> FIG. 7. Robustness comparison between gradient descent (GD) and pseudoinverse parameter updates for Iris classi-fication. (a) Test accuracy as a function of learning rate η. GD maintains competitive performance for small ηbut degrades sharply above η= 0 .5, whereas the pseudoinverse update remains stable across the full range tested. (b) Test accuracy under increasingly ill-conditioned feature scaling ( s0, s 3), where s0and s3denote the scaling factors applied to the first and last features, respectively. GD accuracy drops substantially as the condition number increases, while the pseudoinverse update retains above 93% accuracy throughout. Error bars indicate one standard deviation over 25 independent trials.

us to construct a parameter update rule that ap-proximates gradient descent. With this design, the parameter update becomes: 

θnew = θ + η · M (G(y, θ′), G (y, θ)) (59) 

> (i)

≈ θ + η · JGM (G, G ′) · Jθ G(y, θ) · (θ′ − θ)(60) 

> (ii )

≈ θ + ηλ · (Jθ G)+ · Jθ G · (θ′ − θ) (61) 

> (iii )

= θ + ηλ · (θ′ − θ), (62) where (i) applies the first-order linear approxima-tion, (ii) substitutes the design from equation (2), and (iii) uses the pseudoinverse property ( Jθ G)+ ·

Jθ G ≈ I.For nudging rules where θ′ − θ ∝ ∇ θ L(θ), this results in effective gradient descent toward mini-mizing the loss function. However, more generally one can treat G(y, θ) as a black box and measure linear response to update θ given the infinitesimal linear approximation. This approach works well for single-output problems and small multi-output cases ( n ≤ 3). For higher-dimensional outputs (n > 3), on the other hand, the inverse mapping 

δθ ∝ G−1(ztarget − G(y, θ)) relies heavily on in-finitesimal linear approximations through Jacobian-based updates. In such cases, establishing explicit non-linear models for the intermediate y → z map-pings will presumably improve training efficiency compared to relying solely on local linear approxi-mations. The accuracy of such approximations depends on the size of the perturbation ∥θ′ − θ∥ and the nonlin-earity of G. The error term is: Error = G(y, θ′) − G(y, θ) − Jθ G(y, θ) · (θ′ − θ).

(63) For sufficiently small perturbations, this error be-comes negligible compared to the first-order term, which is the key assumption that enables effective parameter learning through PCPL. 

> APPENDIX C: MORE ON TUNABLE MULTIPLIERS Tunable multiplier with squeezing

We consider a tunable multiplier using squeezing gates. In a single-mode Gaussian circuit, applying a displacement ˆD(d · e) followed by squeezing ˆS(s · δf )to vacuum gives an x-quadrature mean that depends on both signals. Here d and s are trainable param-eters, so d · e and s · δf are simply classical signals scaled by fixed gains before encoding into the cir-cuit. However, we will show how to find suitable values based on the target system. The interaction between the two signals arises from the nonlinear dependence e−s·δf introduced by the squeezing gate acting on the already-displaced state. 

⟨ˆx⟩ = √2 d · e · e−s δf (64) since the squeezing scales the displacement mean by 

e−s δf , where rotation is not yet applied. In the regime s · δf ≪ 1 this approximates: 

⟨ˆx⟩ ≈ √2 d · e · (1 − s δf ) (65) 19 which contains the product term s · d · δf · e and the first term is fixed values for fixed e. We therefore define a single-mode circuit layer as: ˆR(ϕ) ˆS(s · δf ) ˆD(d · e) |0⟩ (66) where s, d, and ϕ are trainable parameters and the rotation ˆR(ϕ) aligns the output quadrature with the measurement axis, giving ⟨ˆx⟩ = √2 d · e · e−s δf cos ϕ.This circuit is trained to minimize 1 − R2 between its output and the classical gradient ( δf /ε ) · e over a dataset of realistic ( δf, e ) pairs generated from the CV linear classifier with random parameters. We re-fer to this as the DSR circuit . The full circuit with 

L layers has trainable parameters {sℓ, d ℓ, ϕ ℓ}Lℓ=1 , to-talling 3 L parameters, with output ⟨ˆx0⟩. Figure 8 shows the circuit diagram and the training perfor-mance. The inputs δf = f (x; θi + ε) − f (x; θ) and 

e = ytrue − f (x; θ) are computed classically be-fore being encoded into the circuit. The circuit pa-rameters {sℓ, d ℓ, ϕ ℓ}Lℓ=1 are pre-trained offline and fixed during Iris classifier training. Specifically, the DSR multiplier is trained offline using a dataset of (δf, e, g classical ) tuples generated by running the CV linear classifier with randomly sampled parameter vectors θ ∼ Uniform( −0.3, 0.3) 12 on Iris training samples, with nθ = 50 random parameter sweeps per sample. For each sweep, a random parame-ter index i is selected, the finite difference δf =

f (x; θi + ε) − f (x; θ) is computed with ε = 0 .015, and the error e = ytrue −f (x; θ) is recorded. The cir-cuit parameters are optimized by minimizing 1 − R2

between the circuit x-quadrature mean output and 

gclassical = ( δf /ε ) · e using a coordinate-wise ran-dom search optimizer over 400 iterations with initial learning rate 0 .1 and decay factor 0 .997. Inputs δf 

and e are normalized by their training-set standard deviations before encoding. Now we test for classification by combining the DSR multiplier (with pre-trained data) and the D gate parameter update circuit (same as the main text). Figure 9 shows the classification performance with this combined circuit. Learning is inconsis-tent across trials due to approximation error intro-duced by the nonlinear squeezing-based multiplica-tion, which only approximates δf · e in the small-signal regime s · δf ≪ 1. When this condition is violated, the gradient signal deviates from the true error-weighted finite difference, causing parameter updates to point in incorrect directions. Within in-dividual trials, fluctuations in training accuracy are also observed; to mitigate this, we record the best-performing parameters during training and restore them at the end (15 epochs, learning rate η = 1 .0). Nevertheless, in successful trials the best accuracy reaches 96 .0%, demonstrating that the DSR multi-plier can provide sufficient gradient information for effective learning when the operating conditions are favorable. The inconsistency arises from two main sources: (1) parameter range clipping in the D gate update circuit, which truncates large parameter up-dates and prevents the classifier from reaching cer-tain regions of parameter space; and (2) the nonlin-earity of the squeezing-based multiplication, which introduces a systematic bias in the gradient esti-mate that grows with the magnitude of δf . Since both sources of error are data- and initialization-dependent, some random seeds lead to favorable op-erating regimes where the approximation holds well throughout training, while others do not. This sensi-tivity to initialization is an inherent limitation of the pure CV approach without planned circuit design. A more carefully designed CV multiplier circuit, with explicit consideration of the operating range of δf 

and e and a circuit architecture that reduces the de-pendence on the small-signal approximation, would be expected to improve both consistency and accu-racy across trials. 

> Tunable linear optical multiplier

: Configuration A (from main text) and classical update comparison To isolate the contribution of each CV component, we compare four configurations: 

• Configuration A pairs the linear optical mul-tiplier gradient with the CV displacement up-date (the full CV system) 

• Configuration B replaces the CV gradient with a classical finite-difference gradient while re-taining the CV displacement update 

• Configuration C retains the CV gradient but replaces the displacement update with classical gradient descent 

• Configuration D uses classical gradients and classical gradient descent throughout, serving as the full classical baseline. Table II summarizes the results across 25 indepen-dent trials. All four configurations achieve identical performance: 98 .7% best test accuracy, 96 .2% final test accuracy, and 2 .3% standard deviation. The ab-sence of any measurable difference across configura-tions indicates that the linear optical multiplier gra-dient is functionally equivalent to the classical finite-difference gradient, and that the CV displacement update is functionally equivalent to classical gradi-ent descent, at least for this task. This is consistent 20            

> ⟨ˆx0⟩|0⟩D(dℓ·e, 0) S(sℓ·δf )R(ϕℓ)
> (a) Trainable circuit diagram
> (b) Training performance FIG. 8. DSR multiplier.
> FIG. 9. Performance of the DSR multiplier across trials.

with the theoretical expectation that the linear op-tical multiplier circuit computes δf · e/ε to machine precision via the beam splitter intensity-difference identity, and that the displacement update circuit implements arithmetic addition exactly within the Gaussian backend. The CV components therefore do not introduce approximation errors relative to their classical counterparts, and the full CV sys-tem of Configuration A achieves classical-equivalent accuracy while realizing both gradient computation and parameter update as physical analog operations. See Fig. 10. 21 

TABLE II. Ablation results across 25 independent trials (20 epochs). Config Train (best) Train (final) Test (best) Test (final) Std (test) A 98.7% 96.3% 98.7% 96.2% 2.3% B 98.7% 96.3% 98.7% 96.2% 2.3% C 98.7% 96.3% 98.7% 96.2% 2.3% D 98.7% 96.3% 98.7% 96.2% 2.3% 

FIG. 10. Performance comparison among different combinations of classical and CV learning components using the same seeds.